\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename rust.info
@settitle Rust Documentation
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@syncodeindex fn cp

@ifinfo
This manual is for the ``Rust'' programming language.

Copyright 2006-2009 Graydon Hoare

All rights reserved (for the time being).
@end ifinfo

@dircategory Programming
@direntry
* rust: (rust).         Rust programming language
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Rust
@subtitle A general-purpose programming language
@author Graydon Hoare

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2006-2009 Graydon Hoare

All rights reserved (for the time being).
@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Top

Rust Documentation

Rust is a general-purpose programming language. It supports imperative
procedural, concurrent actor and pure functional styles. Rust also
supports generic programming and metaprogramming, in both static and
dynamic styles.

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Disclaimer::                 Notes on a work in progress.
* Introduction::               Background, intentions, relationships to other languages.
* Tutorial::                   Gentle introduction to reading Rust code.
* Reference::                  Systematic reference of language elements.
* Index::                      Index
@end menu

@ifnottex
Complete table of contents
@end ifnottex

@contents

@c ############################################################
@c Disclaimer
@c ############################################################

@node    Disclaimer
@chapter Disclaimer

Gentle reader,

You are looking at a work in progress. This is a @emph{non-public} and
decidedly @emph{unfinished} document describing an even-less-finished
language that has been stewing in my unconscious for a very long time,
working its way out through successive sketches and prototypes,
background reading, and eventually a spare-time ``full''
implementation starting a little less than 4 years ago. I am sending
it to you in order to get focused review on the material presented
within. If you have a moment, I'd like to present some caveats and
requests:

@itemize
@item
I have written this document entirely in the present tense, despite a
majority of the features described within only existing in a very
sketchy, partial, or entirely absent form in the @emph{bootstrap}
compiler. Moreover, work on the ``real'' @emph{self-hosting} compiler
is only just beginning, and for the most part if something sounds
not-yet-implemented, it may well not be. Switching writing tenses
and/or constantly updating the document to track implementation
progress seemed too tedious to bother with, so I haven't. If you want
to know about progress on a particular feature, please ask me.

@item
At the time of this writing, the bootstrap compiler is about 20,000
lines of Ocaml -- including its own backend -- and emits small but
otherwise very inefficient native x86 code in PE and ELF
executables. It handles the memory, process and communication model,
including all slot modes, lifecycle and transplantation, and can
define and call functions (including simple C functions), spawn
processes, and manipulate basic structural types such as vectors,
tuples and records. But it is still very much in development.

@item
Please keep this document, the existence of this work and my
engagement in it, completely to yourself. I've selected a group of
people to review this work but I am not at all interested in
publishing before the language is at a ``suitably demonstrable''
stage. Writing languages is delicate work and actually doesn't benefit
all that much in early stages from ``release early, release
often''. It benefits a lot in later stages, and I have every intention
to release it publicly under a nice friendly MIT license once it's
condensed and contracted to the point that it's worth playing with.

@item
Regarding ``contraction'': the language @emph{shrinks} the more I work
on it. This is a good thing: parsimony is a virtue in languages. Most
of the time I've spent on this language has involved convincing ideas
that didn't quite seem like they could be merged to merge, so that I
could discard one or another of them. Therefore, while the version you
are seeing in this document is ``being filled in'', the scope is
progressing @emph{inward} as the pieces solidify, from more features
to fewer. Therefore I ask that @emph{if} you provide feedback that
suggests feature @emph{additions}, you think long and hard about
whether they would work in a library, whether they might be deferrable
to a later version of the language, or whether they might be omitted
altogether while still providing something of use.  I will be
absolutely thrilled if I manage to ship all the pieces described here,
but I expect I'll need to throw a few more out before I'm done. Adding
is not my goal in requesting feedback.
@end itemize

Thanks for your time.
@flushright
                                   - Graydon Hoare
                                     Sept 2009
@end flushright


@c ############################################################
@c Introduction
@c ############################################################

@node    Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@quotation
  We have to fight chaos, and the most effective way of doing that is
  to prevent its emergence.
@flushright
                                   - Edsger Dijkstra
@end flushright
@end quotation
@sp 2

Rust is a ``curly-brace'' block-structured statement language. It
visually resembles the C language family, but differs significantly in
syntactic and semantic details. It is strongly oriented towards
concerns of ``programming in the large'', that is, of creating and
maintaining @emph{boundaries} -- both abstract and operational -- that
preserve large-system integrity and availability.

@menu
* Goals::                      Intentions, motivations.
* Sales Pitch::                A summary for the impatient.
* Influences::                 Relationship to past languages.
@end menu


@node    Goals
@section Goals

The language design pursues the following goals:

@sp 1
@itemize
@item Compile-time error detection and prevention.
@item Run-time fault tolerance and containment.
@item System building, analysis and maintenance affordances.
@item Clarity and precision of expression.
@item Implementation simplicity.
@item Run-time efficiency.
@end itemize
@sp 1

Note that most of these goals are @emph{engineering} goals, not
showcases for sophisticated language technology. Most of the
technology in Rust is @emph{old} and has been seen decades earlier in
other languages.

Also note that ``terseness'' and ``expressiveness'' are absent from
the list. Rust programs are often larger and more verbose than
equivalent programs in other languages. 

@page
@node    Sales Pitch
@section Sales Pitch

The following comprises a brief ``sales pitch'' overview of the
salient features of Rust, relative to other languages.

@itemize

@sp 1
@item Predictable native code, simple runtime

The meaning and cost of every operation within a Rust program is
intended to be easy to model for the reader. The code should not
``surprise'' the programmer once it has been compiled.

Rust is designed to be compiled to mostly-static native code, with
relatively large compilation units and plenty of room for whole-unit
optimisation. The output of a Rust compilation is a standard loadable
object of machine code (ELF, PE, Mach-O), containing standard metadata
(DWARF), and works with existing disassemblers, analysis tools,
debuggers and profilers. Such object files can be dynamically loaded,
via the standard operating-system loader, into other processes, and
executed cooperatively.

The runtime is relatively small and provides some memory management,
lightweight process scheduling, internal communication queueing and
reflection services, but these are all implemented in a
straightforward and obvious fashion, in standard C, with a low-level
service provider interface available to embeddings. No research-level
virtual machine, JIT or garbage collection technology is required.

@sp 1
@item Integrated system-construction facility

The units of compilation of Rust are multi-file amalgamations called
@emph{crates}. A crate is described by a separate, declarative type of
source file that guides the compilation of the crate, its packaging,
its versioning, and its external dependencies. Crates are also the
units of distribution and loading. Significantly: the dependency graph
of crates is @emph{acyclic} and @emph{anonymous}: there is no global
namespace for crates, and module-level recursion cannot cross crate
barriers.

Unlike many languages, individual modules do @emph{not} carry all the
mechanisms or restrictions of crates. Modules and crates serve
different roles.

@sp 1
@item Lightweight cooperative processes

Like many @emph{actor} languages, Rust provides an isolation (and
concurrency) model based on lightweight processes scheduled by the
language runtime. These processes are inexpensive and @emph{mostly}
statically secure from one another; breaking the rule of process
isolation is only possible by calling external (C) code.

Inter-process communication is typed, asynchronous and simplex, based
on passing messages over channels to ports. Transmission can be
rate-limited or rate-unlimited. Communication is fair and
pseudo-randomised on the receiver side.

@sp 1
@item Stack-based iterator functions

Between the extremes of ``asynchronous concurrent processes'' and
``synchronous single-invocation functions'', Rust also provides a form
of multiple-invocation iterator function, modeled after the same
facility in @code{CLU}. Iterator functions can @emph{temporarily}
suspend execution and return a value to their caller, resuming
execution at the point of suspension when they are re-invoked.

The iterator function facility is tightly integrated into the
@code{for} loop construct. Only @code{for} loop headers can invoke
iterator functions, and iterator frames live on the same call stack as
normal function frames, so cannot escape the invoking loop.

@sp 1
@item Direct interface to C code

Rust can load and call many C library functions simply by declaring
them in the enclosing crate file. Calling a C function statically
marks a process as ``unsafe'', unless the unsafe process is further
isolated within an external ``heavyweight'' operating-system
subprocess. Every ``unsafe'' process in a Rust compilation unit must
be explicitly marked as audited and authorised in the crate file.

@sp 1
@item Typestate system

Every storage slot in Rust participates in not only a conventional
structural static type system, describing the interpretation of memory
in the slot, but also a @emph{typestate} system. The static typestates
of a program describe the set of @emph{pure, dynamic predicates} that
provably hold over some set of slots, at each point in the program's
control flow graph. The static calculation of the typestates of a
program is a dataflow problem, and handles user-defined predicates in
a similar fashion to the way the type system permits user-defined
types.

A short way of thinking of this is: types statically model the kinds
of values held in slots, typestates statically model @emph{assertions
that hold} before and after statements.

@sp 1
@item Safe control over memory allocation, packing and aliasing.

Every variable or field in Rust is a combination of a type and a mode;
this combination is called a @emph{slot}. There are 4 kinds of slot
mode, denoting 4 ways of referring to a value:

@itemize
@item ``interior'' (by value)
@item ``exterior'' (by reference-counted heap allocation)
@item ``read-alias'' (by provably-owned direct address)
@item ``write-alias'' (as with read-alias, but permitting writes)
@end itemize

Interior slots declared as variables in a function are allocated very
quickly on the stack, as part of a local activation frame, as in C or
C++. Read-alias slots permit efficient by-reference parameter passing
without adjusting heap reference counts, as alias lifetimes outlive
callee lifetimes. Write-alias slots additionally permit controlled
mutation of a parameter by a callee, effectively providing ``out
parameters''.

Copying data between slots of different modes may cause either a
simple address assignment or reference-count adjustment, or may cause
a value to be ``transplanted'': copied by value from the interior of
one memory structure to another, or between stack and
heap. Transplanting, when necessary, is predictable and automatic, as
part of the definition of the copy operator (@code{=}).

In addition, slots have a static initialisation state that is
calculated by the typestate system. This permits late initialisation
of variables in functions with complex control-flow, while still
guaranteeing that every use of a slot occurs after it has been
initialised.

@sp 1
@item Acyclic ownership graph, copy-on-write memory semantics.

Three of the four slot modes in Rust are mutable, but writing through
a slot requires that the writer is the sole owner of the memory
structure being written to. When a structure is shared by an exterior
slot with a reference count greater than one, the structure is
automatically duplicated, and the now-private copy is written to.

Having an acyclic ownership graph supports a ``semi-functional'' view
of values, in which memory structures are mutable, but always
@emph{effectively private} to the variable ``owning'' them. This
assumption is required by the typestate system, the communication
system and the slot transplanting system.

@sp 1
@item Structural algebraic data types

The Rust type system is structural rather than nominal (with the
exception of opaque module types), and contains the standard
assortment of useful ``algebraic'' type constructors from functional
languages, such as function types, tuples, record types, vectors, and
tagged disjoint unions. Structural types may be @emph{pattern-matched}
in an @code{alt} statement.

@sp 1
@item Generic code

Rust supports a simple form of parametric polymorphism: functions,
types and modules can be parameterised by other types. Type parameters
are treated as opaque within the parameterised code.

@sp 1
@item Argument binding

Rust lacks a general facility for capturing lexical environments in
first class @emph{closures}, but instead supports a form of partial
function-argument application via the @code{bind} operator. Binding
arguments in Rust is similar to the feature of @emph{function
currying} in other languages, but may bind @emph{any} members of an
argument tuple, not just the leftmost.

@sp 1
@item Local type inference

To save some quantity of programmer key-pressing, Rust supports local
type inference: signatures of functions and programs always require
type annotation, but within the body of a function many types can be
declared @code{auto} and Rust will infer the type from its use in the
function.

@sp 1
@item Existential module system

Rust's module system is based on existential types with local
opening. It permits higher-order modules, module composition,
projection and indirection. Modules are both static binding constructs
and also first class values, but are (mostly) orthogonal to
compilation units.

@sp 1
@item Dynamic type

Rust includes support for slots of a top type, @code{any}, that can
hold any type of value whatsoever. An @code{any} slot is simply a pair
of a type code and an exterior value of that type. Injection into an
@code{any} and projection by type-case-selection is integrated into the
language.

@sp 1
@item Dynamic metaprogramming (reflection)

Rust supports run-time reflection on the structure of a crate, using
the same DWARF tables used to support the @code{any} type and various
other runtime services.

@sp 1
@item Static metaprogramming (syntactic extension)

Rust supports a system for syntactic extension that can be loaded into
the compiler, to implement user-defined notations, macros,
program-generators and the like. These notations are @emph{marked}
using a special form of bracketing, such that a reader unfamiliar with
the extension can still parse the surrounding text by skipping over
the bracketed ``extension text''.

@sp 1
@item Signal handling

The Rust runtime includes a system for sending @emph{signals} to
processes.  A signal is similar to a normal message sent on a normal
channel, with two differences: signals are usually
sent @emph{spontaneously} by the runtime, due to external events; and
they are sent @emph{to a process}, rather than a particular port. The
types of value that can be sent as a signal are pre-defined for all
processes, as part of the standard library.

Some signals can be trapped, others cannot. If a signal cannot be
trapped, a process receiving it immediately @emph{fails}. If a signal
can be trapped, a process receiving it can specify whether to ignore
the signal, route it to a channel, or fail.

@sp 1
@item Failure and finishing

If a process fails due to a signal, or if it executes the
special @code{fail} statement, it enters the @emph{failing} state. A
failing process unwinds its control stack, frees all of its owned
resources and enters the @emph{finished} state. Failure is idempotent
and non-recoverable.

If a process finishes due to failure, it may cause the runtime to
signal any @emph{linked} processes. This can be used to independently
arrange supervision and failure-propagation modes for groups of
related processes.

@sp 1
@item Deterministic destruction

Processes have destructors -- called @code{fini} blocks -- which are
executed deterministically in bottom-up ownership order, as control
frames are exited and/or owned processes are otherwise freed from data
structures holding them. The same destructors are run in the same
order whether the process finishes due to failure or normal execution.

Similarly, the rules for freeing non-process memory are deterministic
and predictable: on scope-exit or structure-release, interior slots
are released immediately, exterior slots have their reference count
decreased and are released if the count drops to zero. Alias slots are
not affected by scope exit.

@end itemize


@page
@node    Influences
@section Influences
@sp 2

@quotation
  The essential problem that must be solved in making a fault-tolerant
  software system is therefore that of fault-isolation. Different programmers
  will write different modules, some modules will be correct, others will have
  errors. We do not want the errors in one module to adversely affect the
  behaviour of a module which does not have any errors.

@flushright
                                   - Joe Armstrong
@end flushright
@end quotation
@sp 2

@quotation
  In our approach, all data is private to some process, and processes can
  only communicate through communications channels. @emph{Security}, as used
  in this paper, is the property which guarantees that processes in a system
  cannot affect each other except by explicit communication.

  When security is absent, nothing which can be proven about a single module
  in isolation can be guaranteed to hold when that module is embedded in a
  system [...]
@flushright
                                   - Robert Strom and Shaula Yemini
@end flushright
@end quotation
@sp 2

@quotation
  Concurrent and applicative programming complement each other. The
  ability to send messages on channels provides I/O without side effects,
  while the avoidance of shared data helps keep concurrent processes from
  colliding.
@flushright
                                   - Rob Pike
@end flushright
@end quotation
@sp 2

@page
Rust is not a particularly original language. It may however appear
unusual by contemporary standards, as its design elements are drawn
from a number of ``historical'' languages that have, with a few
exceptions, fallen out of favour. Four prominent lineages contribute
the most:

@itemize
@sp 1
@item
The NIL (1981) and Hermes (1990) family. These languages were
developed by Robert Strom, Shaula Yemini, David Bacon and others in
their group at IBM Watson Research Center (Yorktown Heights, NY, USA).

@sp 1
@item
The Napier (1985) and Napier88 (1988) family. These languages were
developed by Malcolm Atkinson, Ron Morrison and others in their group
at the University of St. Andrews (St. Andrews, Fife, UK).

@sp 1
@item
The Erlang (1987) language, developed by Joe Armstrong, Robert
Virding, Claes Wikstr@"om, Mike Williams and others in their group at
the Ericsson Computer Science Laboratory (@"Alvsj@"o, Stockholm, Sweden) .

@sp 1
@item
The Newsqueak (1988), Alef (1995), and Limbo (1996) family. These languages
were developed by Rob Pike, Phil Winterbottom, Sean Dorward and others in
their group at Bell labs Computing Sciences Reserch Center (Murray Hill,
NJ, USA).
@end itemize

@sp 1
Additional influences can be seen from the ML family, Camlp4, and various
``pre-Object-Orientation'' languages of the 70s (CLU, Ada, Mesa, Alphard,
Euclid, etc.)

@c ############################################################
@c Tutorial
@c ############################################################

@node    Tutorial
@chapter Tutorial

@emph{TODO}.

@c ############################################################
@c Reference
@c ############################################################

@node    Reference
@chapter Reference

@menu
* Ref.Lex::                     Lexical structure.
* Ref.Path::                    References to slots and items.
* Ref.Gram::                    Grammar.
* Ref.Comp::                    Compilation and component model.
* Ref.Mem::                     Semantic model of memory.
* Ref.Proc::                    Semantic model of processes.
* Ref.Item::                    The components of a module.
* Ref.Type::                    The types of values held in memory.
* Ref.Expr::                    Parsed and primitive expressions.
* Ref.Stmt::                    Program execution as sequences of statements.
* Ref.Run::                     Organisation of runtime services.
@end menu

@page
@node    Ref.Lex
@section Ref.Lex
@c * Ref.Lex::                     Lexical structure.

The lexical structure of a Rust source file or crate file is defined
in terms of Unicode character codes and character properties.

Groups of Unicode character codes and characters drawn from particular
property classes are organised into @emph{tokens}. Tokens are defined
as the longest contiguous sequence of characters within the same token
type (identifier, keyword, literal, symbol), or interrupted by ignored
characters.

Most tokens in Rust follow rules similar to the C and Java family.

@emph{TODO: formalise this section much more}.

@menu
* Ref.Lex.Ignore::       Ignored characters.
* Ref.Lex.Ident::        Identifier tokens.
* Ref.Lex.Key::          Keyword tokens.
* Ref.Lex.Num::          Numeric tokens.
* Ref.Lex.Text::         String and character tokens.
* Ref.Lex.Syntax::       Syntactic extension tokens.
* Ref.Lex.Sym::          Special symbol tokens.
@end menu

@page
@node       Ref.Lex.Ignore
@subsection Ref.Lex.Ignore
@c * Ref.Lex.Ignore::            Ignored tokens.

The classes of @emph{whitespace} and @emph{comment} is ignored, and
are not considered as tokens.

@dfn{Whitespace} is any sequence of Unicode characters with the
@emph{General Category} property @code{Zs}, @code{Zl}, or @code{Zp}.

@dfn{Comments} are any sequence of Unicode characters beginning with
U+002f U+002f (@code{//}) and extending to the end of a line (a
Unicode character with @emph{General Category}
property @code{Zl}), @emph{excluding} cases in which such a sequence
occurs within a string literal token or a syntactic extension token.


@page
@node       Ref.Lex.Ident
@subsection Ref.Lex.Ident
@c * Ref.Lex.Ident::             Identifier tokens.

Identifiers follow the pattern of C and Java identifiers: they begin
with a @emph{letter} or underscore character @code{_} (Unicode
character U+005f), and continue with any combination of
@emph{letters}, @emph{digits} and underscores, and must not be equal
to any keyword. @xref{Ref.Lex.Key}.

A @emph{letter} is a Unicode character with the @emph{General
Category} property @code{Lu}, @code{Ll}, @code{Lt}, @code{Lm},
or @code{Lo}.

A @emph{digit} is a Unicode character with the @emph{General Category}
property @code{Nd}.

@page
@node       Ref.Lex.Key
@subsection Ref.Lex.Key
@c * Ref.Lex.Key::                Keyword tokens.

The keywords are:

@sp 2

@multitable @columnfractions .15 .15 .15 .15 .15
@item @code{mod}
@tab @code{pub}
@tab @code{use}
@tab @code{meta}
@tab @code{syntax}
@item @code{let}
@tab @code{auto}
@tab @code{type}
@tab @code{pure}
@tab @code{native}
@item @code{int}
@tab @code{char}
@tab @code{bool}
@tab @code{true}
@tab @code{false}
@item @code{u8}
@tab @code{u16}
@tab @code{u32}
@tab @code{u64}
@tab @code{f64}
@item @code{s8}
@tab @code{s16}
@tab @code{s32}
@tab @code{s64}
@item @code{rec}
@tab @code{tag}
@tab @code{vec}
@tab @code{str}
@tab @code{any}
@item @code{prog}
@tab @code{proc}
@tab @code{port}
@tab @code{chan}
@tab @code{flush}
@item @code{if}
@tab @code{else}
@tab @code{alt}
@tab @code{case}
@item @code{do}
@tab @code{while}
@tab @code{break}
@tab @code{cont}
@item @code{init}
@tab @code{main}
@tab @code{fail}
@tab @code{fini}
@tab @code{spawn}
@item @code{log}
@tab @code{note}
@tab @code{bind}
@tab @code{check}
@tab @code{prove}
@item @code{fn}
@tab @code{fn?}
@tab @code{fn!}
@tab @code{fn*}
@tab @code{fn+}
@item @code{for}
@tab @code{for?}
@tab @code{for!}
@tab @code{for*}
@tab @code{for+}
@item @code{ret}
@tab @code{ret?}
@tab @code{ret!}
@tab @code{ret*}
@tab @code{ret+}
@item @code{put}
@tab @code{put?}
@tab @code{put!}
@tab @code{put*}
@tab @code{put+}
@item @code{be}
@tab @code{be?}
@tab @code{be!}
@tab @code{be*}
@tab @code{be+}
@end multitable

@sp 2
In addition to these names, any symbols consisting of a single
lowercase letter in the ASCII range @code{a-z} followed by a sequence
of 1 or more decimal digits is reserved as a future machine type in
a later version of the language. @xref{Ref.Type.Mach}.

@page
@node       Ref.Lex.Num
@subsection Ref.Lex.Num
@c * Ref.Lex.Num::                 Numeric tokens.

@emph{TODO: describe numeric literals}.

@page
@node       Ref.Lex.Text
@subsection Ref.Lex.Text
@c * Ref.Lex.Key::                 String and character tokens.

@emph{TODO: describe string and character literals}.

@page
@node       Ref.Lex.Syntax
@subsection Ref.Lex.Syntax
@c * Ref.Lex.Syntax::              Syntactic extension tokens.

Syntactic extensions are marked with the @emph{pound} sigil @code{#}
(U+0023), followed by a qualified name of a compile-time imported
module, an optional parenthesized list of @emph{tokens}, and an
optional brace-enclosed region of free-form text (with brace-matching
and brace-escaping used to determine the limit of the
region). @xref{Ref.Comp.Syntax}.

@emph{TODO: formalise those terms more}.

@page
@node       Ref.Lex.Sym
@subsection Ref.Lex.Sym
@c * Ref.Lex.Sym::                 Special symbol tokens.

The special symbols are:

@sp 2

@multitable @columnfractions .1 .1 .1 .1 .1 .1

@tab @code{@@}
@tab @code{~}
@tab @code{^}
@tab @code{_}
@item @code{#}
@tab @code{:}
@tab @code{.}
@tab @code{;}
@tab @code{,}
@item @code{[}
@tab @code{]}
@tab @code{@{}
@tab @code{@}}
@tab @code{(}
@tab @code{)}
@item @code{=}
@tab @code{<-}
@tab @code{<|}
@tab @code{<+}
@tab @code{->}
@item @code{+}
@tab @code{++}
@tab @code{+=}
@tab @code{-}
@tab @code{--}
@tab @code{-=}
@item @code{*}
@tab @code{/}
@tab @code{%}
@tab @code{*=}
@tab @code{/=}
@tab @code{%=}
@item @code{&}
@tab @code{|}
@tab @code{!}
@tab @code{&=}
@tab @code{|=}
@tab @code{!=}
@item @code{>>}
@tab @code{>>>}
@tab @code{<<}
@tab @code{<<=}
@tab @code{>>=}
@tab @code{>>>=}
@item @code{<}
@tab @code{<=}
@tab @code{==}
@tab @code{>=}
@tab @code{>}
@item @code{&&}
@tab @code{||}
@tab @code{&&=}
@tab @code{||=}
@end multitable

@page
@page
@node    Ref.Path
@section Ref.Path
@c * Ref.Path::               References to slots and items.

A @dfn{path} is a ubiquitous syntactic form in Rust that deserves
special attention. A path denotes a slot or an
item. @xref{Ref.Mem.Slot}. @xref{Ref.Item}. Every slot and item in a
Rust crate has a @emph{canonical path} that refers to it from the
crate top-level, as well as a number of shorter @emph{relative paths}
that may also denote it in inner scopes of the crate. There is no way
to define a slot or item without a canonical path within its crate
(with the exception of the crate's implicit top-level module). Paths
have meaning only within a specific crate. @xref{Ref.Comp.Crate}.

Paths consist of period-separated components. In the simplest
form, path components are identifiers. @xref{Ref.Lex.Ident}.

Two examples of simple paths consisting of only identifier components:
@example
x;
x.y.z;
@end example

Paths fall into two important categories: @emph{names} and
@emph{lvals}.

A @dfn{name} denotes an item, and is statically resolved to its
referent at compile time.

An @dfn{lval} denotes a slot, and is statically resolved to a sequence
of memory operations and primitive (arithmetic) expressions required
to load or store to the slot at compile time.

In some contexts, the Rust grammar accepts a general @emph{path}, but
a subsequent syntactic restriction requires the path to be an lval or
a name. In other words: in some contexts an lval is required (for
example, on the left hand side of the copy operator,
@pxref{Ref.Stmt.Copy}) and in other contexts a name is required (for
example, as a type parameter, @pxref{Ref.Item}). In no case is the
grammar made ambiguous by accepting a general path and restricting
allowed paths to names or lvals after parsing. These restrictions are
noted in the grammar. @xref{Ref.Gram}.

A name component may include type parameters. Type parameters are
denoted by square brackets. Square brackets are used @emph{only} to
denote type parameters in Rust. If a name component includes a type
parameter, the type parameter must also resolve statically to a type
in the environment of the name. Type parameters are only part of the
names of items. @xref{Ref.Item}.

An example of a name with type parameters:
@example
m.map[int,str].key;
@end example

An lval component may include an indexing operator. Index operators
are enclosed in parentheses and can include any integral
expression. Indexing operators can only be applied to vectors or
strings, and imply a run-time bounds-check. @xref{Ref.Type.Vec}.

An example of an lval with a dynamic indexing opertor:
@example
x.y.(1 + v).z;
@end example

@page
@node    Ref.Gram
@section Ref.Gram
@c * Ref.Gram::                    Grammar.

@emph{TODO: LL(1), it reads like C, Alef and Napier; formalise here}.

@page
@node    Ref.Comp
@section Ref.Comp
@c * Ref.Comp::                    Compilation and component model.

Rust is a @emph{compiled} language. Its semantics are divided along
a @emph{phase distinction} between compile-time and run-time. Those
semantic rules that have a @emph{static interpretation} govern the
success or failure of compilation. A program that fails to compile due
to violation of a compile-time rule has no defined semantics at
run-time; the compiler should halt with an error report, and produce
no executable artifact.

The compilation model centers on artifacts called @emph{crates}. Each
compilation is directed towards a single crate in source form, and if
successful produces a single crate in executable form.

@menu
* Ref.Comp.Crate::              Units of compilation, versioning, distribution and loading.
* Ref.Comp.Meta::               Metadata about a crate.
* Ref.Comp.Syntax::             Syntax extensions.
@end menu

@page
@node       Ref.Comp.Crate
@subsection Ref.Comp.Crate
@c * Ref.Comp.Crate::              Units of compilation, versioning, distribution and loading.
@c NOTE influences: SML CM, Mesa Configurations, owens/flatt "units"

A @dfn{crate} is a unit of compilation, versioning, distribution and
loading. Crates are defined by @emph{crate source files}, which are a
type of source file written in a special declarative
language: @emph{crate language}.@footnote{A crate is somewhat
analogous to an @emph{assembly} in the ECMA-335 CLI model, a
@emph{library} in the SML/NJ Compilation Manager, a @emph{unit}
in the Owens and Flatt module system, or a @emph{configuration} in
Mesa.} A crate source file describes:

@itemize
@item Metadata about the crate, such as author, name, version, and copyright.
@item The contents of the crate, a set of Rust modules in other Rust source files.
@item The set of syntax extensions to make available during compilation of the crate.
@item The set of native functions that the crate imports.
@item The set of @emph{other} crates that the crate depends on.
@item The organisation of the crate's internal namespace.
@item The set of names exported from the crate.
@end itemize

A single crate source file may describe the compilation of a large
number of Rust source files; it is compiled in its entirety, as a
single indivisible unit. The compilation phase attempts to
transform a single crate source file, and its referenced contents,
into a single compiled crate. Crate source files and compiled crates
have a 1:1 relationship.

The syntactic form of a crate is a sequence of @emph{directives}, some
of which have nested sub-directives.

A crate defines an implicit top-level anonymous module: within this
module, all members of the crate have canonical path
names. @xref{Ref.Path}. The @code{mod} directives within a crate file
specify sub-modules to include in the crate: these are either
directory modules, corresponding to directories in the filesystem of
the compilation environment, or file modules, corresponding to Rust
source files. The names given to such modules in @code{mod} directives
become prefixes of the paths of items and slots defined within any
included Rust source files.

The @code{use} directives within the crate specify @emph{other crates}
to import into the crate's namesapce; these directives may specify
loose or tight ``matching criteria'' for imported crates, depending on
the preferences of the crate developer. In the simplest case, a
@code{use} directive may only specify a symbolic name and leave the
task of locating and binding an appropriate crate to a compile-time
heuristic. In a more controlled case, a @code{use} directive may
specify any metadata as matching criteria, such as a URI, an author
name or version number, a checksum or even a cryptographic signature,
in order to select an an appropriate imported crate. @xref{Ref.Comp.Meta}.

The compiled form of a crate is a loadable and executable object file
full of machine code, in a standard loadable operating-system format
such as ELF, PE or Mach-O. The loadable object contains extensive
DWARF metadata, describing:
@itemize
@item Metadata required for type reflection.
@item The publicly exported module structure of the crate.
@item Any free-form metadata about the crate, defined by @code{meta} directives.
@item The crates to dynamically link with at run-time, with matching criteria
derived from the same @code{use} directives that guided compile-time imports.
@end itemize

The @code{syntax} directives of a crate are similar to the @code{use}
directives, except they govern the syntax extension namespace
(accessed through the syntax-extension sigil @code{#},
@pxref{Ref.Comp.Syntax}) available only at compile time. A
@code{syntax} directive also makes its extension available to all
subsequent directives in the crate file.

The @code{native} directives of a crate declare top-level ``special''
items that are not available to nested modules. This restriction
simplifies the treatment of first-class modules elsewhere in the
language.

An example of a crate:

@example
// Metadata about this crate
meta author = "Jane Doe";
meta name = "Project X";
meta version = "2.5";

// Import a module.
use std (version = "1.0");

// Activate a syntax-extension.
syntax re;

// Define some modules.
pub mod foo = "foo.rs";
mod bar @{
    mod quux = "quux.rs";
@}
@end example

@page
@node       Ref.Comp.Meta
@subsection Ref.Comp.Meta

In a crate, a @code{meta} directive associates free form key-value
metadata with the crate. This metadata can, in turn, be used in
providing partial matching parameters to syntax-extension loading and
crate importing directives, denoted by @code{syntax} and @code{use}
keywords respectively.

Alternatively, metadata can serve as a light-weight form of
documentation.

@page
@node          Ref.Comp.Syntax
@subsection    Ref.Comp.Syntax
@c * Ref.Comp.Syntax::        Syntax extension.

Rust provides a notation for @dfn{syntax extension}. The notation is a
marked syntactic form that can appear as an expression, statement or
item in the body of a Rust program, or as a directive in a Rust crate,
and which causes the text enclosed within the marked form to be
translated through a named extension function loaded into the compiler
at compile-time.

The compile-time extension function must return a value of the
corresponding Rust AST type, either an expression node, a statement
node or an item node. @footnote{The syntax-extension system is
analogous to the extensible reader system provided by Lisp
@emph{readtables}, or the Camlp4 system of Objective Caml.}
@xref{Ref.Lex.Syntax}.

A syntax extension is enabled by a @code{syntax} directive, which must
occur in a crate file. When the Rust compiler encounters a
@code{syntax} directive in a crate file, it immediately loads the
named syntax extension, and makes it available for all subsequent
crate directives within the enclosing block scope of the crate file,
and all Rust source files referenced as modules from the enclosing
block scope of the crate file.

For example, this extension might provide a syntax for regular
expression literals:

@example
// In a crate file:

// Requests the 're' syntax extension from the compilation environment.
syntax re; 

// Also declares an import dependency on the module 're'.
use re;

// Reference to a Rust source file as a module in the crate.
mod foo = "foo.rs";

@dots{}

// In the source file "foo.rs", use the #re syntax extension and
// the re module at run-time.
let str s = get_string();
let regex pattern = #re.pat@{ aa+b? @};
let bool matched = re.match(pattern, s);
@end example

@page
@node    Ref.Mem
@section Ref.Mem
@c * Ref.Mem::                     Semantic model of memory.

A Rust process' memory consists of a static set of @emph{items}, a set
of processes each with its own @emph{stack}, and a @emph{heap} shared
by all processes.

Allocations in the stack and the heap consist of @emph{slots}.

@menu
* Ref.Mem.Alloc::               Memory allocation model.
* Ref.Mem.Own::                 Memory ownership model.
* Ref.Mem.Slot::                Memory containment and reference model.
* Ref.Mem.Init::                Initialisation state of memory.
@end menu

@page
@node       Ref.Mem.Alloc
@subsection Ref.Mem.Alloc
@c * Ref.Mem.Alloc::               Memory allocation model.

The @dfn{items} of a program are those functions, modules, types, and
other artifacts that have their value calculated at compile-time and
stored uniquely in the memory image of the rust process. Items are
neither dynamically allocated nor freed.

A process' @dfn{stack} consists of activation frames automatically
allocated on entry to each function as the process executes. A stack
allocation is reclaimed when control leaves the frame containing it.

The @dfn{heap} consists of an acyclic reference graph of
reference-counted, copy-on-write allocations made explicitly by
memory-allocating statements. A heap allocation lives until the last
reference to it drops, at which point it is automatically reclaimed.

@page
@node       Ref.Mem.Own
@subsection Ref.Mem.Own
@c * Ref.Mem.Own::                 Memory ownership model.

A process @emph{directly owns} all the dynamic allocations in its
stack and @emph{lazily owns} all the dynamic allocations in the heap
reachable through references originating in its stack. A process does
not own any items.

@dfn{Direct ownership} of an allocation means that the owning process
is the only process that can access the allocation.

@dfn{Lazy ownership} of an allocation means that the owning process
is the only process that can @emph{observe its own modifications} to the
allocation.

When a stack frame is exited, its directly owned (stack) allocations are all
released, and its references to lazily owned (heap) allocations are
dropped, decrementing their reference counts.

When a process finishes, its stack is necessarily empty. The process'
interior slots are released as the process itself is released, and its
references to lazily owned (heap) allocations are dropped,
decrementing their reference counts.

@page
@node       Ref.Mem.Slot
@subsection Ref.Mem.Slot
@c * Ref.Mem.Slot::                Memory containment and reference model.

A @dfn{slot} is a component of an allocation. A slot either holds a
value or the address of another allocation. Every slot has one of four
possible @emph{modes}.

The possible @dfn{modes} of a slot are:

@itemize
@sp 1
@item @dfn{Interior mode}

The slot holds the value of the slot.

@sp 1
@item @dfn{Exterior mode}

The slot holds the address of a reference-counted, copy-on-write heap
allocation that holds the value of the slot.

Exterior slots are indicated by the @emph{at} sigil @code{@@}.

For example, the following code allocates an exterior record, copies
it by counted-reference to a second exterior slot, then modifies the
record through the second exterior slot, causing the record to be
replicated in the heap.
@example
type point3d = rec(int x, int y, int z);
let @@point3d pt1 = rec(x=1, y=2, z=3);
let @@point3d pt2 = pt1;
pt2.z = 4;
@end example

@sp 1
@item @dfn{Write-alias mode}

The slot holds the address of a value. The referenced value may reside
within a stack allocation or a heap allocation. If the referenced
value resides within a heap allocation, the heap allocation is
necessarily unshared: it has reference count equal to 1. Write-alias
slots can only be declared as members of a function signature.

Write-alias slots are indicated by the @emph{caret} sigil @code{^}.

For example, the following function accepts a single write-alias
parameter:
@example
fn incr(^int i) -> () @{
    i = i + 1;
@}
@end example

@sp 1
@item @dfn{Read-alias mode}

The meaning of the slot is the same as if it were in write-alias mode,
but the value can only be read from the slot, not written to. Read-alias
slots can only be declared as members of a function signature.

Read-alias slots are indicated by the @emph{tilde} sigil @code{~}.

For example, the following function accepts a single read-alias
parameter:
@example
type point3d = rec(int x, int y, int z);

fn extract_z(~point3d p) -> int @{
    ret p.z;
@}
@end example

@end itemize

@page
@node       Ref.Mem.Init
@subsection Ref.Mem.Init
@c * Ref.Mem.Init::                Initialisation state of memory.

A slot is either initialised or uninitialised at every point in a
program. An @dfn{initialised} slot is one that holds a value. An
@dfn{uninitialised} slot is one that has not yet had a value written
into it, or has had its value deleted, and so holds undefined
memory. The typestate system ensures that an uninitialised slot cannot
be read, but can be written to. A slot becomes initialised in any
statement that writes to it, and remains initialised until explicitly
destroyed or until its enclosing allocation is destroyed.


@page
@node    Ref.Proc
@section Ref.Proc
@c * Ref.Proc::                    Semantic model of processes.

A executing Rust program is called a
@dfn{process}. @xref{Ref.Item.Prog}. Each Rust process has a program,
an identity, a stack, a set of outgoing communication channels and
incoming communication ports, and lazy ownership of some portion of
the heap of a single operating-system process.

Multiple Rust processes may coexist in a single operating-system
process. Execution of multiple Rust processes in a single
operating-system process may be either truly concurrent or interleaved
by the runtime scheduler. Rust processes are lightweight: each
consumes less memory than an operating-system process, and switching
between Rust processes is faster than switching between
operating-system processes.

@menu
* Ref.Proc.Comm::               Inter-process communication.
* Ref.Proc.Life::               Process lifecycle and state transitions.
* Ref.Proc.Sched::              Process scheduling model.
@end menu

@page
@node       Ref.Proc.Comm
@subsection Ref.Proc.Comm
@c * Ref.Proc.Comm::               Inter-process communication.

With the exception of @emph{unsafe} constructs, Rust processes are
isolated from interfering with one another's memory directly. Instead
of manipulating shared storage, Rust processes communicate with one
another using a typed, asynchronous, simplex message-passing system.

A @dfn{port} is a communication endpoint that can @emph{receive}
messages. Ports receive messages from channels.

A @dfn{channel} is a communication endpoint that can @emph{send}
messages. Channels send messages to ports.

Each port has a unique identity and cannot be replicated. If a port
value is copied from one slot to another, both slots refer to
the @emph{same} port, even if the slots are declared as
interior-mode. New ports can be constructed dynamically and stored in
data structures.

Each channel is bound to a port when the channel is constructed, so
the destination port for a channel must exist before the channel
itself. A channel cannot be rebound to a different port from the one
it was constructed with.

Many channels can be bound to the same port, but each channel is bound
to a single port. In other words, channels and ports exist in an N:1
relationship, N channels to 1 port, where N is a non-negative
integer. @footnote{It may help to remember nautical terminology when
differentiating channels from ports.  Many different waterways --
channels -- may lead to the same port.}

Each port and channel can carry only one type of message. The message type
is encoded as a parameter of the channel or port type. The message type
of a channel is equal to the message type of the port it is bound to.

Messages are sent asynchronously or semi-synchronously. A channel
contains a message queue and asynchronously sending a message merely
inserts it into the channel's queue; message receipt is the
responsibility of the receiving process.

Queued messages in channels are considered part of the memory budget
of the @emph{sending} process. If too many messages are queued for
transmission from a single sending process, without being received by
a receiving process, the sending process may exceed its memory budget,
which causes a run-time signal. To help control this possibility, a
semi-synchronous send operation is possible, which blocks until there
is room in the existing queue and then executes an asynchronous
send. A full @code{flush} operation is also available, which blocks
until a channel's queue is @emph{empty}. A @code{flush} does
@emph{not} guarantee that a message has been @emph{received} by any
particular recipient when the sending process is
unblocked. @xref{Ref.Stmt.Flush}.

The asynchronous message-send operator is @code{<+}. The
semi-synchronous message-send operator is @code{<|}. @xref{Ref.Stmt.Send}. The
message-receive operator is @code{<-}. @xref{Ref.Stmt.Recv}.

@page
@node       Ref.Proc.Life
@subsection Ref.Proc.Life
@c * Ref.Proc.Life::               Process lifecycle and state transitions.

The @dfn{lifecycle} of a process consists of a finite set of states
and events that cause transitions between the states. The lifecycle states
of a process are:

@itemize
@item initialising
@item running
@item native call
@item blocked reading
@item blocked writing
@item blocked flushing
@item failing
@item finished
@end itemize

A process begins its existence -- when it is spawned -- in the
@emph{initialising} state. It remains in this state until its parent
completes its @code{init} block successfully or fails. The
@emph{parent} is responsible for running the @code{init} block -- the
code executes in the stack and budget of the parent -- but the
@code{init} block can access only the @emph{scope} of the child (its
member slots and items). If a signal is generated while the parent is
executing the child's @code{init} block, it is delivered to
the @emph{parent} process. The parent process is suspended during
execution of the child's @code{init} block, analogous to the parent
making a normal function call.

When the parent completes the @code{init} block, the child transitions
from the @emph{initialising} state to the @emph{running} state. In
this state, its control executes the contents of its @code{main}
block. Code in the @code{main} block has access to any @emph{member
slots} of the process, as does code in the @code{init} and @code{fini}
blocks of the program. @xref{Ref.Item.Prog}.

If a signal is generated while the child is executing the @code{main}
block -- after a child process transitions from
the @emph{initialising} state to the @emph{running} state -- it is
delivered to the child; the parent is isolated from the signal (though
it may receive a linked signal, should the child fail).

If a process makes a native call, it is temporarily suspended from
the @emph{running} state and enters the @emph{native call} state. A
process returns from the @emph{native call} state to
either @emph{running} or @emph{failing}, depending on the execution of
the native code.

A process may transition from the @emph{running} state to
the @emph{blocked reading} state any time it executes a receive
statement (@code{<-}) on a port that does not have any processes
waiting to send. When another process eventually sends on a channel
connected to the receiving port, the receiving process will transition
out of @emph{blocked reading} state, back to @emph{running}.

A process may transition from the @emph{running} state to
the @emph{blocked writing} any time it executes a semi-synchronous
send (@code{<|}) on a channel with a full queue. When the queue has
room, the sending process will unblock and transition out
of @emph{blocked writing} state, back to @emph{running}.

A process may transition from the @emph{running} state to
the @emph{blocked flushing} any time it executes a @code{flush} on a
channel with a nonempty queue. When the queue is empty, the flushing
process will unblock and transition out of @emph{blocked flushing}
state, back to @emph{running}.

A process may transition to the @emph{failing} state at any time, due
to an un-trapped signal or the execution of a @code{fail}
statement. Once @emph{failing}, a process unwinds its stack and
transitions to the @emph{finished} state. No other state transitions
out of the @emph{failing} state are permitted.


@page
@node       Ref.Proc.Sched
@subsection Ref.Proc.Sched
@c * Ref.Proc.Sched::              Process scheduling model.

Every process has a @dfn{time slice counter}, which is a hidden
numeric slot that is decremented on each loop back-edge and function
call. The runtime repeatedly selects a process in the @emph{running}
state, via fair pseudo-random choice, and activates it. If the time
slice counter on a process reaches zero, the process yields control to
the runtime. The process has its time slice counter reset to the
configured initial time slice value for the runtime, and it is once
again made available as a choice for the scheduler to pseudo-randomly select.

If a process enters a non-running state -- for example, if it blocks
on reading or writing -- it is not available for activation by the
scheduler, but its time slice counter is unaffected.

@page
@node    Ref.Item
@section Ref.Item
@c * Ref.Item::               The components of a module.

An @dfn{item} is a component of a module. Items are entirely
determined at compile-time, remain constant during execution, and may
reside in read-only memory.

There are 5 primary kinds of item: types, functions, predicates,
modules, and programs.

All items form an implicit scope for the declaration of sub-items. In
other words, within a function, predicate, type or program body,
declarations of items can (in many cases) be mixed with the
statements, control blocks, and similar artifacts that otherwise
compose the item body. The meaning of these scoped items is the same
as if the item was declared outside the scope, except that the item's
@emph{path name} within the module namespace is qualified by the name
of the enclosing item. The exact locations in which sub-items may be
declared is given by the grammar.  @xref{Ref.Gram}.

Items may be @emph{parameterised} by type. Type parameters are given
as a comma-separated list of identifiers enclosed in square brackets
(@code{[]}), after the name of the item and before its definition.
The type parameters of an item are part of the name, not the type of
the item; in order to refer to the type-parameterised item, a
referencing name must in general provide type arguments as a list of
comma-separated types enclosed within square brackets (though the
type-inference system can often infer such argument types from
context). There are no general parametric types.

@menu
* Ref.Item.Mod::                Items defining modules.
* Ref.Item.Type::               Items defining the types of values and slots.
* Ref.Item.Fn::                 Items defining functions.
* Ref.Item.Pred::               Items defining typestate predicates.
* Ref.Item.Prog::               Items defining programs.
@end menu

@page
@node       Ref.Item.Mod
@subsection Ref.Item.Mod
@c * Ref.Item.Mod::           Items defining sub-modules.

A @dfn{module item} contains declarations of @emph{items}. Items may
include functions, programs, modules, types and predicate
declarations. These declarations have both static and dynamic
interpretation. The purpose of a module is to organise @emph{names}
and control @emph{visibility}. Modules are declared with the keyword
@code{mod}.

An example of a module:
@example
mod map[K,V] @{
    type t = vec[(K,V)];
    fn new() -> t @{
        ret vec();
    @}

    fn add(^t map, ~K key, ~V val) -> () @{
        @dots{}
    @}

    fn? get(~t map, ~K key) -> ~V @{
        @dots{}
    @}
@}
@end example

A module may also be stored as a first class @emph{value}. Such a
value has a @emph{module type}, which complicates the type system
since modules may themselves declare types. @xref{Ref.Type.Mod}. As a result
of the type rules governing modules, a module @emph{value}, if passed
as a first-class entity in a slot, must be @emph{opened} as a declared
@emph{module item} before it can be used in a scope.

Example of opening a module:
@example
// Declare the type of map-modules
type map_ty[K,V] = mod @{
                       type t;
                       fn new() -> t;
                       fn add(^t map, ~K k, ~V v) -> ();
                       fn? get(~t map, ~K k) -> ~V;
                   @};

// Dynamically acquire a particular map-module implementation                                
let map_ty[int,str] map_v = get_map_impl[int,str]();

// Open the map-implementation module value as a module item.
mod map = map_v;

// Use the module item.
let map.t m = map.new();
map.add(m, 10, "hello");
@end example


@page
@node       Ref.Item.Type
@subsection Ref.Item.Type
@c * Ref.Item.Type::          Items defining the types of values and slots.

A @dfn{type} defines an @emph{interpretation} of a value in
memory. @xref{Ref.Type}. Types are declared with the keyword
@code{type}. A type's interpretation is used for the values held in
any slot with that type. @xref{Ref.Mem.Slot}. The interpretation of a
value includes:

@itemize
@item Whether the value is composed of sub-values or is indivisible.
@item Whether the value represents textual or numerical information.
@item Whether the value represents integral or floating-point information.
@item The sequence of memory operations required to access the value and its components.
@end itemize

For example, the type @code{rec(u8 x, u8 y)} defines the
interpretation of values that are composite records, each containing
two unsigned two's complement 8-bit integers accessed through the
components @code{x} and @code{y}, and laid out in memory with the
@code{x} component preceding the @code{y} component.

Some types are @emph{recursive}. A recursive type is one that includes
its own definition as a component, by named reference. Recursive types
are restricted to occur only within a single crate, and only through a
restricted form of @code{tag} type. @xref{Ref.Type.Tag}.

@page
@node       Ref.Item.Fn
@subsection Ref.Item.Fn
@c * Ref.Item.Fn::            Items defining functions.

A @dfn{function item} defines a sequence of statements associated with
a name and a set of parameters. Functions are declared with the
keyword @code{fn}. Functions declare a set of @emph{input slots} as
parameters, through which the caller passes arguments into the
function, and an @emph{output slot} through which the function passes
results back to the caller.

A function may also be copied into a first class @emph{value}, in
which case the value has the corresponding @emph{function type}, and
can be used otherwise exactly as a function item (with a minor
additional cost of calling the function, as such a call is
indirect). @xref{Ref.Type.Fn}.

Every control path in a function ends with either a @code{ret} or
@code{be} statement. If a control path lacks a @code{ret} statement in
source code, an implicit @code{ret} statement is appended to the end
of the control path during compilation, returning the implicit
@code{()} value.

A function may be @emph{pure} or @emph{impure}, depending on the
presence or absence of the keyword prefix @code{pure}. A @dfn{pure}
function is one that has no side effects, calls no impure functions,
and is declared with the @code{pure} keyword. A function lacking any
of these characteristics is @dfn{impure}.

There are two primary kinds of functions: @emph{solo functions}
and @emph{iterator functions}.

@menu
* Ref.Item.Fn.Solo::            Items defining solo functions.
* Ref.Item.Fn.Iter::            Items defining iterator functions.
@end menu

@page
@node          Ref.Item.Fn.Solo
@subsubsection Ref.Item.Fn.Solo
@c * Ref.Item.Fn.Solo::     Items defining solo functions.

Solo functions are those that return a single value. The output slot
of a solo function is the type of value that will be provided when the
function executes a @code{ret} or @code{be} statement and completes
its execution.

A @code{put} statement cannot occur in the statements of a solo
function.

An example of a solo function:
@example
fn add(int x, int y) -> int @{
    ret x + y;
@}
@end example

@page
@node          Ref.Item.Fn.Iter
@subsubsection Ref.Item.Fn.Iter
@c * Ref.Item.Fn.Iter::     Items defining iterator functions.

Iterator functions are those that have a @emph{protocol}. The protocol
of an iterator function defines how many values (in a
``zero-one-infinity'' counting sense) the iterator function will
@code{put} before it executes a @code{ret} or @code{be} statement and
completes its execution. Protocols are indicated by a variant of the
@code{fn} keyword, as follows:

@itemize
@item
@code{fn?} indicates a function that will put either 0 or 1 value, then complete.
@item
@code{fn!} indicates a function that will put exactly 1 value, then complete.
@item
@code{fn*} indicates a function that will put 0 or more values, then complete.
@item
@code{fn+} indicates a function that will put 1 or more values, then complete.
@end itemize

The output type of an iterator function is the type of value that the
function will @code{put}, before it eventually executes a @code{ret}
or @code{be} statement of type @code{()} and completes its execution.

An iterator function can only be called in the loop header of a
matching @code{for} loop. For example a @code{fn+} iterator function
can only be called from a @code{for+} loop header. @xref{Ref.Stmt.For.Iter}.

An example of an iterator function:
@example
fn* range(int lo, int hi) -> int @{
    let int i = lo;
    while (i < hi) @{
        put i;
        i = i + 1;
    @}
@}

let int sum = 0;
for* (int x = range(0,100)) @{
    sum = sum + x;
@}
@end example


@page
@node       Ref.Item.Pred
@subsection Ref.Item.Pred
@c * Ref.Item.Pred::          Items defining typestate predicates.

A predicate is a pure function returning @code{bool}, that also
carries special meaning to the typestate system. Specifically, a
predicate can be used as part of a @emph{constraint}; introducing a new
predicate into a program enlarges the set of constraints that
can be statically checked. @xref{Ref.Stmt.Stat.Constr}. Predicates
are declared with the keyword @code{pred}.

Since predicates are implicitly @code{pure} and implicitly return
@code{bool}, the signature of a @code{pred} cannot include a
@code{pure} modifier, nor specify an output slot.

An example of a predicate:
@example
pred divides(int d, int i) @{
    ret d % i == 0;
@}
@end example

@page
@node       Ref.Item.Prog
@subsection Ref.Item.Prog
@c * Ref.Item.Prog::          Items defining programs.

A program is the inert form of a process. @xref{Ref.Proc}. Programs
are @emph{spawned} in order to produce
processes. @xref{Ref.Stmt.Spawn}. Each process executes a
program. @xref{Ref.Type.Proc}. Programs are declared with the keyword
@code{prog}.

A @code{prog} carries an implicit module, three optional blocks marked
with the keywords @code{init}, @code{main} and @code{fini}, and a set
of @emph{member slots} that are shared between the @code{init},
@code{main} and @code{fini} blocks alone. Significantly: items
declared in the implicit module of a @code{prog} do @emph{not} share
access to the member slots of the @code{prog}.

An example of a @code{prog}:
@example
type stdio = rec(port[u8] stdin,
                 chan[u8] stdout,
                 chan[u8] stderr);
prog byte_copy @{
     let stdio io;
     init (chan[u8] out, chan[u8] err) -> chan[u8] @{
          io.stdin = port();
          io.stdout = out;
          io.stderr = err;
          ret chan(io.stdin);
     @}
     main @{
         u8 tmp;
         while (true) @{
             alt @{
                 case (tmp <- io.in) @{@}
                 case (io.out <| tmp) @{@}
             @}
         @}
     @}
@}
@end example


@page
@node    Ref.Type
@section Ref.Type

Every slot and value in a Rust program has a type. The @dfn{type} of a
@emph{value} defines the interpretation of the memory holding it. The
type of a @emph{slot} may also include constraints. @xref{Ref.Type.Constr}.

Some types and type-constructors are @dfn{built-in}, meaning that
their value constructors are defined in this manual. Other types or
type-constructors are @dfn{user-defined}, meaning that their value
constructors depend on portions of user programs.

Built-in types and type-constructors are tightly integrated into the
language, in nontrivial ways that are not possible to emulate in
user-defined types. User-defined types have limited capabilities. In
addition, every built-in type or type-constructor name is reserved as
a @emph{keyword} in Rust; they cannot be used as user-defined
identifiers in any context.

@menu
* Ref.Type.Any::                An open sum of every possible type.
* Ref.Type.Mach::               Machine-level types.
* Ref.Type.Prim::               Primitive types.
* Ref.Type.Int::                The arbitrary-precision integer type.
* Ref.Type.Text::               Strings and characters.
* Ref.Type.Rec::                Fixed products of heterogeneous types.
* Ref.Type.Tup::                Fixed products of homogeneous types.
* Ref.Type.Vec::                Open products of homogeneous types.
* Ref.Type.Tag::                Closed sums of heterogeneous types.
* Ref.Type.Fn::                 Subroutines and scoped coroutine types.
* Ref.Type.Port::               Unique inter-process message-receipt endpoints.
* Ref.Type.Chan::               Copyable inter-process message-sending capabilities.
* Ref.Type.Proc::               General coroutine-instance types.
* Ref.Type.Prog::               General coroutine-description types.
* Ref.Type.Mod::                Collections of items.
* Ref.Type.Constr::             Constrained types.
* Ref.Type.Type::               Types describing types.
@end menu

@page
@node       Ref.Type.Any
@subsection Ref.Type.Any

The type @code{any} is the union of all possible Rust types. A value
of type @code{any} is represented in memory as a pair consisting of an
exterior value of some non-@code{any} type @var{T} and a reflection
of the type @var{T}.

Values of type @code{any} can be used in an @code{alt type} statement,
in which the reflection is used to select a block corresponding to a
particular type extraction. @xref{Ref.Stmt.Alt}.

@page
@node       Ref.Type.Mach
@subsection Ref.Type.Mach

The machine types are the following:

@itemize
@item
The unsigned two's complement word types @code{u8}, @code{u16},
@code{u32} and @code{u64}, with values drawn from the integer
intervals @math{[0,(2^8)-1)]}, @math{[0,(2^{16})-1)]},
@math{[0,(2^{32})-1)]} and @math{[0,(2^{64})-1)]} respectively.
@item
The signed two's complement word types @code{s8}, @code{s16}, @code{s32} and @code{s64},
with values drawn from the integer
intervals @math{[-(2^7),(2^7)-1)]}, @math{[-(2^{15}),(2^{15})-1)]},
@math{[-(2^{31}),(2^{31})-1)]} and @math{[-(2^{63}),(2^{63})-1)]}
respectively.
@item
The IEEE 754 double-precision floating point type @code{f64}.
@end itemize


@page
@node       Ref.Type.Prim
@subsection Ref.Type.Prim

The primitive types are the following:

@itemize
@item
The unary type @code{()}, having the single value @code{()} (both the
type and the value are pronounced ``nil'').
@item
The boolean type @code{bool} with values @code{true} and @code{false}.
@item
The machine types.
@end itemize

@page
@node       Ref.Type.Int
@subsection Ref.Type.Int

The Rust type @code{int}@footnote{A Rust @code{int} is similar to a
Lisp bignum or a Python long integer, @emph{not} a C @code{int}.} is
an arbitrary precision integer type that fits in a machine
word @emph{when possible} and transparently expands to a boxed ``big
integer'' allocated in the run-time heap when it overflows or
underflows outside of the range of a machine word.

A Rust @code{int} grows to accommodate extra binary digits as they are
needed, by taking extra memory from the memory budget available to
each Rust process, and should only exhaust its range due to memory
exhaustion.

@page
@node       Ref.Type.Text
@subsection Ref.Type.Text

The types @code{char} and @code{str} hold textual data.

A value of type @code{char} is a Unicode character, represented as a
32-bit unsigned word holding a UCS-4 codepoint.

A value of type @code{str} is a Unicode string, represented as a
vector of 8-bit unsigned words holding a UTF-8 codepoints.

@page
@node       Ref.Type.Rec
@subsection Ref.Type.Rec

The record type-constructor @code{rec} forms new heterogeneous product
of slots.@footnote{The @code{rec} type-constructor is analogous to
the @code{struct} type-constructor in the Algol/C family, the
@emph{record} types of the ML family, or the @emph{structure} types of
the Lisp family}. Fields of a @code{rec} type are accessed by name and
are arranged in memory in the order specified by the @code{rec} type.

An example of a @code{rec} type and its use:
@example
type point = rec(int x, int y);
let point p = rec(x=10, y=11);
let int px = p.x;
@end example

@page
@node       Ref.Type.Tup
@subsection Ref.Type.Tup

The tuple type-constructor is a parenthesised, comma-separated list of
two or more slots. It exactly mirrors the tuple value-constructor,
itself a comma-separated list of two or more values.

Tuples are equivalent to records labeled by ascending integer-like
names prefixed by the underscore character: @code{_0}, @code{_1},
@code{_2}, etc. The fields of a tuple are laid out in memory
contiguously, like a record, in order specified by the tuple type. In
addition to named field access, tuples can be be ``destructured'' into
named constituents, in various syntactic contexts, such as in a tuple
initialisation statement or a function parameter list.

An example of a tuple type and its use:
@example
type pair = (int,str);
let pair p = (10,"hello");
check (p._0 == 10);
p._1 = "world";
let (int x, str s) = p;
check (s == p._1 & p._1 == "world");
@end example


@page
@node       Ref.Type.Vec
@subsection Ref.Type.Vec

The vector type-constructor @code{vec} represents a homogeneous,
variable-size array of slots. Vectors automatically resize to
accommodate the addition or removal of elements. Elements can be
accessed by numeric index, but as with records and tuples, all
accessible elements are always initialised.

And example of a @code{vec} type and its use:
@example
let vec[int] v = vec(7, 5, 3);
let int i = v.(2);
@end example

@page
@node       Ref.Type.Tag
@subsection Ref.Type.Tag

The @code{tag} type-constructor forms new heterogeneous disjoint sum
types.@footnote{The @code{tag} type is analogous to a
@code{data} constructor declaration in ML or a @emph{pick ADT} in
Limbo}. A @code{tag} type consists of a number of @emph{variants},
each of which is independently named and takes an optional tuple of
arguments.

The variants of a @code{tag} type may be recursive: that is, the
definition of a @code{tag} type may refer to type definitions that
include the defined @code{tag} type itself. Such recursion has restrictions:
@itemize
@item Recursive types can only be introduced through @code{tag} type definitions.
@item A recursive @code{tag} type must have at least one non-recursive
variant (in order to give the recursion a basis case).
@item The recursive slots of recursive variants must be @emph{exterior}
slots (in order to bound the in-memory size of the variant).
@item Recursive type definitions can cross module boundaries, but not module
@emph{visibility} boundaries, nor crate boundaries (in order to simplify the
module system).
@end itemize

An example of a @code{tag} type and its use:
@example
type animal = tag(dog, cat);
let animal a = dog;
a = cat;
@end example

An example of a @emph{recursive} @code{tag} type and its use:
@example
type list[T] = tag[T](nil,
                      cons(T, @@list[T]));
let list[int] a = cons(7, cons(13, nil));
@end example


@page
@node       Ref.Type.Fn
@subsection Ref.Type.Fn

The function type-constructor @code{fn} forms new function types. A
function type consists of an optional protocol, an input type, an
output type, and a set of flags indicating special characteristics of
the function (@code{pure} or @code{lim}). Like all functions, values
of function type may be @emph{solo functions} or @emph{iterator
functions}. @xref{Ref.Item.Fn}.

An example of a solo @code{fn} type:
@example
fn add(int x, int y) -> int @{
  ret x + y;
@}

let int x = add(5,7);

type binop = fn(int,int) -> int;
let binop bo = add;
x = bo(5,7);
@end example


@page
@node       Ref.Type.Port
@subsection Ref.Type.Port

The port type-constructor @code{port} forms types that describe
ports. A port is the @emph{receiving end} of a typed, asynchronous,
simplex inter-process communication facility. @xref{Ref.Proc.Comm}. A
@code{port} type takes a single type parameter, denoting the type of
value that can be received from a @code{port} value of that type.

Values of type @code{port}, like those of type @code{proc}, have
purely @emph{local} meaning: they denote communication endpoints
only @emph{within} a single process. A port is therefore best thought
of as a @emph{private handle} that a process can use to refer to its
own ports, but that cannot be used by other processes. If a process
attempts to use a @code{port} value it received over a channel, it
receives a signal.

An example of a @code{port} type:
@example
type port[vec[str]] svp;
let svp p = get_port();
let vec[str] v;
v <- p;
@end example

@page
@node       Ref.Type.Chan
@subsection Ref.Type.Chan

The channel type-constructor @code{chan} forms types that describe
channels. A channel is the @emph{sending end} of a typed,
asynchronous, simplex inter-process communication
facility. @xref{Ref.Proc.Comm}. A @code{chan} type takes a single type
parameter, denoting the type of value that can be sent to a channel of
that type.

Channels are also @emph{weak}: a channel is directly coupled to a
particular destination port on a particular process, but does not keep
that port or process @emph{alive}. A channel may therefore fail to
operate at any moment. If a process sends to a channel that is
connected to a nonexistent port, it receives a signal.

An example of a @code{chan} type:
@example
type chan[vec[str]] svc;
let svc c = get_chan();
let vec[str] v = vec("hello", "world");
c <| v;
@end example

@page
@node       Ref.Type.Proc
@subsection Ref.Type.Proc

The process type @code{proc} describes values that are @emph{live
processes}.

Processes form an @emph{ownership tree} in which each process (except
the root process) is directly owned by exactly one parent process. The
purpose of a variable of @code{proc} type is to manage the lifecycle
of the associated process. Communication is carried out solely using
channels and ports.

Processes cannot be replicated. If a copy of a slot of
type @code{proc} is copied to another slot, both slots refer to
the @emph{same} process value.

Values of type @code{proc}, like those of type @code{port}, have
purely @emph{local} meaning: they denote processes only @emph{within}
a single process, their parent. A @code{proc} value is best thought of
as a @emph{private handle} that a parent can use to refer to its own
children, but that cannot be used by other processes; it can be
compared for equality and copied around, but does
@emph{not} refer to a process when used outside its owning (parent)
process. If a process attempts to use a @code{proc} value it received
over a channel, it receives a signal.

If all references to a process are dropped (due to the release of any
slots holding those references), the released process immediately fails.
@xref{Ref.Proc.Life}.

@page
@node       Ref.Type.Prog
@subsection Ref.Type.Prog

The program type-constructor @code{prog} forms new program types. A
program type consists of a signature, similar to a function type with
no protocol, describing the inputs and outputs of the initialisation
routine for programs of that type.

An example of a @code{prog} type:
@example
type stdio_prog = prog(chan[u8], chan[u8]) -> chan;
let stdio_prog cat = get_byte_copy();
let port[u8] out = port();
let port[u8] err = port();
let (proc p, chan[u8] in) = spawn cat(chan(out), chan(err));
@end example

@page
@node       Ref.Type.Mod
@subsection Ref.Type.Mod
@c * Ref.Type.Mod::                Units of information hiding.

@emph{TODO: first-class existential module types}.

@page
@node       Ref.Type.Constr
@subsection Ref.Type.Constr
@c * Ref.Type.Constr::             Constrained types.

A @dfn{constrained type} is a type that carries a @emph{formal
constraint} (@pxref{Ref.Stmt.Stat.Constr}), which is similar to a
normal constraint except that the @emph{base name} of any slots
mentioned in the constraint must be the special @emph{formal
symbol} @emph{*}.

When a constrained type is instantiated in a particular slot
declaration, the formal symbol in the constraint is replaced with the
name of the declared slot and the resulting constraint is checked
immediately after the slot is declared. @xref{Ref.Stmt.Check}.

An example of a constrained type with two separate instantiations:
@example
type ordered_range = rec(int low, int high) : less_than(*.low, *.high);

let ordered_range rng1 = rec(low=5, high=7);
// implicit: 'check less_than(rng1.low, rng1.high);'

let ordered_range rng2 = rec(low=15, high=17);
// implicit: 'check less_than(rng2.low, rng2.high);'
@end example

@page
@node       Ref.Type.Type
@subsection Ref.Type.Type
@c * Ref.Type.Type::               Types describing types.

@emph{TODO}.

@page
@node    Ref.Expr
@section Ref.Expr
@c * Ref.Expr::               Parsed and primitive expressions.

Rust has two kinds of expressions: @emph{parsed expressions} and
@emph{primitive expressions}.  The former are syntactic sugar and are
eliminated during parsing. The latter are very minimal, consisting
only of paths, possibly combined via a single level (non-recursive)
unary or binary machine-level operation (ALU or FPU). @xref{Ref.Path}.

For the most part, Rust semantics are defined in terms of
@emph{statements}, which parsed expressions are desugared to. The
desugaring is defined in the grammar. @xref{Ref.Gram}. The residual
primitive statements appear only in the right hand side of copy
statements, @xref{Ref.Stmt.Copy}.

@page
@node    Ref.Stmt
@section Ref.Stmt
@c * Ref.Stmt::               Program execution as sequences of statements.

A @dfn{statement} is a component of a function, or a predicate, or a
program's @code{init}, @code{main} or @code{fini} blocks. When a
program is instantiated into a process, the process @emph{executes}
statements in an order determined by the body of the enclosing
structure. Each statement causes the process to perform certain
actions.

@menu
* Ref.Stmt.Stat::               The static typestate system of statement analysis.
* Ref.Stmt.Decl::               Statement declaring an item or slot.
* Ref.Stmt.Copy::               Statement for copying a value between two slots.
* Ref.Stmt.Spawn::              Statements for creating new processes.
* Ref.Stmt.Send::               Statements for sending a value into a channel.
* Ref.Stmt.Flush::              Statement for flushing a channel queue.
* Ref.Stmt.Recv::               Statement for receiving a value from a channel.
* Ref.Stmt.Call::               Statement for calling a solo function.
* Ref.Stmt.Bind::               Statement for binding arguments to functions.
* Ref.Stmt.Ret::                Statement for stopping and producing a value.
* Ref.Stmt.Be::                 Statement for stopping and executing a tail call.
* Ref.Stmt.Put::                Statement for pausing and producing a value.
* Ref.Stmt.Fail::               Statement for causing process failure.
* Ref.Stmt.Log::                Statement for logging values to diagnostic buffers.
* Ref.Stmt.Note::               Statement for logging values during failure.
* Ref.Stmt.While::              Statement for simple conditional looping.
* Ref.Stmt.Break::              Statement for terminating a loop.
* Ref.Stmt.Cont::               Statement for terminating a single loop iteration.
* Ref.Stmt.For::                Statement for complex conditional looping.
* Ref.Stmt.If::                 Statement for simple conditional branching.
* Ref.Stmt.Alt::                Statement for complex conditional branching.
* Ref.Stmt.Prove::              Statement for static assertion of typestate.
* Ref.Stmt.Check::              Statement for dynamic assertion of typestate.
* Ref.Stmt.IfCheck::            Statement for dynamic testing of typestate.
@end menu

@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Stat
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Stat
@c * Ref.Stmt.Stat::         The static typestate system of statement analysis.

Statements have a detailed static semantics. The static semantics
determine, on a statement-by-statement basis, the @emph{effects} the
statement has on its environment, as well the @emph{legality} of the
statement in its environment.

The legality of a statement is partly governed by syntactic rules,
partly by its conformance to the types of slots it affects, and partly
by a purely statement-oriented static analysis. This section describes
the statement-oriented static analysis, also called the
@emph{typestate} system.

@menu
* Ref.Stmt.Stat.Point::         Inter-statement positions of logical judgments.
* Ref.Stmt.Stat.CFG::           The control flow graph formed by statements.
* Ref.Stmt.Stat.Constr::        Predicates applied to slots.
* Ref.Stmt.Stat.Cond::          Constraints required and implied by a statement.
* Ref.Stmt.Stat.Typestate::     Constraints that hold at points.
* Ref.Stmt.Stat.Check::         Relating dynamic state to static typestate.
@end menu

@page
@node          Ref.Stmt.Stat.Point
@subsubsection Ref.Stmt.Stat.Point
@c * Ref.Stmt.Stat.Point::         Inter-statement positions of logical judgments.

A @dfn{point} exists before and after any statement in a Rust program.
For example, this code:

@example
 s = "hello, world";
 print(s);
@end example

Consists of two statements and four points:

@itemize
@item the point before the first statement
@item the point after the first statement
@item the point before the second statement
@item the point after the second statement
@end itemize

The typestate system reasons over points, rather than statements. This
may seem counterintuitive, but points are the more primitive
concept. Another way of thinking about a point is as a set of
@emph{instants in time} at which the state of a process is fixed. By
contrast, a statement represents a @emph{duration in time}, during
which the state of the process changes. The typestate system is
concerned with constraining the possible states of a process' memory
at @emph{instants}; it is meaningless to speak of the state of a
process' memory ``at'' a statement, as each statement is likely to
change the contents of memory.

@page
@node          Ref.Stmt.Stat.CFG
@subsubsection Ref.Stmt.Stat.CFG
@c * Ref.Stmt.Stat.CFG::           The control flow graph formed by statements.

Each @emph{point} can be considered a vertex in a directed
@emph{graph}. Each kind of statement implies a single edge in this
graph between the point before the statement and the point after it,
as well as a set of zero or more edges from the points of the
statement to points before other statements. The edges between points
represent @emph{possible} indivisible control transfers that might
occur during execution.

This implicit graph is called the @dfn{control flow graph}, or @dfn{CFG}.

@page
@node          Ref.Stmt.Stat.Constr
@subsubsection Ref.Stmt.Stat.Constr
@c * Ref.Stmt.Stat.Constr::          Predicates applied to slots.

A @dfn{constraint} is a predicate applied to specific slots. @xref{Ref.Item.Pred}.

For example, consider the following code:

@example
pred is_less_than(int a, int b) @{
     ret a < b;
@}

fn test() @{
   int x = 10;
   int y = 20;
   check is_less_than(x,y);
@}
@end example

This example defines the predicate @code{is_less_than}, and applies it
to the slots @code{x} and @code{y}. The constraint being checked on
the third line of the function is @code{is_less_than(x,y)}.

@page
@node          Ref.Stmt.Stat.Cond
@subsubsection Ref.Stmt.Stat.Cond
@c * Ref.Stmt.Stat.Cond::          Constraints required and implied by a statement.

A @dfn{condition} is a set of zero or more constraints.

Each @emph{point} has an associated @emph{condition}:

@itemize
@item The @dfn{precondition} of a statement is the condition the statement requires in the point before the condition.
@item The @dfn{postcondition} of a statement is the condition the statement enforces in the point after the statement.
@end itemize

Any constraint present in the precondition and @emph{absent} in the
postcondition is considered to be @emph{dropped} by the statement.

@page
@node          Ref.Stmt.Stat.Typestate
@subsubsection Ref.Stmt.Stat.Typestate
@c * Ref.Stmt.Stat.Typestate::     Constraints that hold at points.

The typestate checking system @emph{calculates} an additional
condition for each point called its typestate. For a given statement,
we call the two typestates associated with its two points the prestate
and a poststate.

@itemize
@item The @dfn{prestate} of a statement is the typestate of the point before the statement.
@item The @dfn{poststate} of a statement is the typestate of the point after the statement.
@end itemize

A @dfn{typestate} is a condition that has @emph{been determined by the
typestate algorithm} to hold at a point. This is a subtle but
important point to understand: preconditions and postconditions are
@emph{inputs} to the typestate algorithm; prestates and poststates are
@emph{outputs} from the typestate algorithm.

The typestate algorithm analyses the preconditions and postconditions
of every statement in a block, and attempts to compute a condition for
each typestate. Specifically:

@itemize
@item Initially, every typestate is empty.
@item Each statement's poststate is given the union of the statement's prestate, precondition, and postcondition.
@item Each statement's poststate has the difference between the statement's precondition and postcondition removed.
@item Each statement's prestate is given the intersection of the poststates of every parent statement in the CFG.
@item The previous three steps are repeated until no typestates in the block change.
@end itemize

The typestate algorithm is a very conventional dataflow calculation,
and can be performed using bit-set operations, with one bit per
predicate and one bit-set per condition.

After the typestates of a block are computed, the typestate algorithm
checks that every constraint in the precondition of a statement is
satisfied by its prestate. If any preconditions are not satisfied, the
mismatch is considered a static (compile-time) error.


@page
@node          Ref.Stmt.Stat.Check
@subsubsection Ref.Stmt.Stat.Check
@c * Ref.Stmt.Stat.Check::         Relating dynamic state to static typestate.

The key mechanism that connects run-time semantics and compile-time
analysis of typestates is the use of @code{check}
statements. @xref{Ref.Stmt.Check}. A @code{check} statement guarantees
that @emph{if} control were to proceed past it, the predicate associated with the
@code{check} would have succeeded, so the constraint being
checked @emph{statically} holds in subsequent
statements.@footnote{A @code{check} statement is similar to
an @code{assert} call in a C program, with the significant difference
that the Rust compiler @emph{tracks} the constraint that
each @code{check} statement enforces. Naturally, @code{check}
statements cannot be omitted from a ``production build'' of a Rust
program the same way @code{asserts} are frequently disabled in
deployed C programs.}

From this building block, constraints can be propagated to function
signatures and constrained types, and the responsibility
to @code{check} a constraint pushed further and further away from the
site at which the program requires it to hold in order to execute
properly.

@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Decl
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Decl
@c * Ref.Stmt.Decl::                Statement declaring an item or slot.

A @dfn{declaration statement} is one that introduces a @emph{name}
into the enclosing statement block. The declared name may denote a new
slot or a new item. The scope of the name extends to the entire
containing block, both before and after the declaration.

@menu
* Ref.Stmt.Decl.Item::              Statement declaring an item.
* Ref.Stmt.Decl.Slot::              Statement declaring a slot.
@end menu

@page
@node          Ref.Stmt.Decl.Item
@subsubsection Ref.Stmt.Decl.Item
@c * Ref.Stmt.Decl.Item::                Statement declaring an item.

An @dfn{item declaration statement} has a syntactic form identical to
an item declaration within a module. Declaring an item -- a function,
type, module, predicate or program -- locally within a statement block
is simply a way of restricting its scope to a narrow region containing
all of its uses; it is otherwise identical in meaning to declaring the
item outside the statement block.

@page
@node          Ref.Stmt.Decl.Slot
@subsubsection Ref.Stmt.Decl.Slot
@c * Ref.Stmt.Decl.Slot::                Statement declaring an slot.

A @code{slot declaration statement} has one one of two forms:

@itemize
@item @code{let} @var{mode-and-type} @var{slot} @var{optional-init};
@item @code{auto} @var{slot} @var{optional-init};
@end itemize

Where @var{mode-and-type} is a slot mode and type expression,
@var{slot} is the name of the slot being declared, and
@var{optional-init} is either the empty string or an equals sign
(@code{=}) followed by a primitive expression.

Both forms introduce a new slot into the containing block scope. The
new slot is visible across the entire scope, but is initialised only
at the point following the declaration statement.

The latter (@code{auto}) form of slot declaration causes the compiler
to infer the static type of the slot through unification with the
types of values assigned to the slot in the the remaining code in the
block scope. Inferred slots always have @emph{interior}
mode. @xref{Ref.Mem.Slot}.



@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Copy
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Copy
@c * Ref.Stmt.Copy::                Statement for copying a value between two slots.

A @dfn{copy statement} consists of an @emph{lval} -- a name denoting a
slot -- followed by an equals-sign (@code{=}) and a primitive
expression. @xref{Ref.Expr}.

Executing a copy statement causes the value denoted by the expression
-- either a value in a slot or a primitive combination of values held
in slots -- to be copied into the slot denoted by the @emph{lval}.

A copy may entail the formation of references, the adjustment of
reference counts, partially replicating the referent of the
@emph{lval} in order to prepare it for writing, or similar adjustments
in order to respect the @code{lval} slot mode. All such adjustment is
automatic and implied by the @code{=} operator.

An example of three different copy statements:
@example
x = y;
x.y = z;
x.y = z + 2;
@end example

@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Spawn
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Spawn
@c * Ref.Stmt.Spawn::               Statements creating new processes.

A @code{spawn} statement takes a program (@pxref{Ref.Item.Prog}), a
set of initialiser arguments for the program, and an @emph{lval}
denoting a 2-tuple of a @code{proc} slot and the output type of a
program. The @code{spawn} statement causes the runtime to construct a
new process running the program. @xref{Ref.Proc.Life}.

The newly spawned process runs its @code{init} block in the execution
context of the spawning process. When the @code{init} block completes it
returns a value to the spawning process. The returned value, as well as
a @code{proc} value holding the new process, are copied into the @emph{lval}
on the left hand side of the spawn statement's equals sign (@code{=}). 

An example of a @code{spawn} statement:
@example
let port[u8] out = port();
let port[u8] err = port();
let (proc p, chan[u8] in) = spawn byte_copy(chan(out), chan(err));
@end example

@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Send
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Send
@c * Ref.Stmt.Send::               Statements for sending a value into a channel.

Sending a value through a channel can be done via two different
statements.  Both statements take an @emph{lval}, denoting a
channel, and apply a send operator to it and a value to send.

The @emph{asynchronous send} operator @code{<+} adds a value to the
channel's queue, without blocking. If the queue is full, it is
extended, taking memory from the process' memory budget. If the
process memory budget is exhausted, a signal is sent to the process.

The @emph{semi-synchronous send} operator @code{<|} adds a value to
the channel's queue @emph{only if} the queue has room; if the queue is
full, the operation @emph{blocks} the sender until the queue has room.

An example of an asynchronous send:
@example
chan[str] c = @dots{};
c <+ "hello, world";
@end example

An example of a semi-synchronous send:
@example
chan[str] c = @dots{};
c <| "hello, world";
@end example

@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Flush
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Flush
@c * Ref.Stmt.Flush::              Statement for flushing a channel queue.

A @code{flush} statement takes a channel and blocks the flushing
process until the channel's queue has emptied. It can be used to
implement a more precise form of flow-control than with the send
operators alone.

An example of the @code{flush} statement:
@example
chan[str] c = @dots{};
c <| "hello, world";
flush c;
@end example


@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Recv
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Recv
@c * Ref.Stmt.Recv::               Statement for receiving a value from a channel.

The @dfn{receive statement} takes an @code{lval} to receive into and
an @emph{lval} denoting a port, and applies the @emph{receive
operator} @code{<-} to the port. The statement causes the receiving
process to enter the @emph{blocked reading} state until a process is
sending a value to the port, at which point the runtime fairly and
pseudo-randomly selects a sending process and moves a value from the
head of one of the process queues to the receiving slot, and un-blocks
the receiving process. @xref{Ref.Run.Comm}.

An example of a @emph{receive}:
@example
port[str] p = @dots{};
let str s <- p;
@end example

@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Call
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Call
@c * Ref.Stmt.Call::               Statement for calling a solo function.

A @dfn{call statement} invokes a solo function, providing a tuple of
input slots and a reference to an output slot. If the solo function
eventually returns, then the statement completes.

A call statement statically requires that the precondtion declared in
the callee's signature is satisfied by the statement prestate. In this
way, typestates propagate through function
boundaries. @xref{Ref.Stmt.Stat}.

An example of a call statement:
@example
let int x = add(1, 2);
@end example

@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Bind
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Bind
@c * Ref.Stmt.Bind::               Statement for binding arguments to functions.

A @dfn{bind statement} constructs a new function from an existing
function. The new function has zero or more of its arguments
@emph{bound} into a new, hidden exterior tuple that holds the
bindings. For each concrete argument passed in the @code{bind}
statement, the corresponding parameter in the existing function is
@emph{omitted} as a parameter of the new function. For each argument
passed the placeholder symbol @code{_} in the @code{bind} statement,
the corresponding parameter of the existing function is
@emph{retained} as a parameter of the new function.

Any subsequent invocation of the new function with residual arguments
causes invocation of the existing function with the combination of
bound arguments and residual arguments that was specified during the
binding.

An example of a @code{bind} statement:
@example
fn add(int x, int y) -> int @{
    ret x + y;
@}
type single_param_fn = fn(int) -> int;

let single_param_fn add4 = bind add(4, _);

let single_param_fn add5 = bind add(_, 5);

check (add(4,5) == add4(5));
check (add(4,5) == add5(4));

@end example

In all cases, a @code{bind} statement makes a @emph{copy} of the bound
arguments when it is executed. Subsequent modification to the values
passed as bound arguments will have no affect on the bound values; the
bound values are private to the new function.

Binding a write-alias parameter is prohibited.

The @code{bind} statement is a lightweight mechanism for simulating
the more elaborate construct of @emph{lexical closures} that exist in
other languages. Rust has no support for lexical closures, but many
realistic uses of them can be achileved with @code{bind} statements.


@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Ret
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Ret
@c * Ref.Stmt.Ret::                Statement for stopping and producing a value.

Executing a @code{ret} statement@footnote{A @code{ret} statement is
analogous to a @code{return} statement in the C family.}  copies a
value into the return slot of the current function, destroys the
current function activation frame, and transfers control to the caller
frame.

An example of a @code{ret} statement:
@example
fn max(int a, int b) -> int @{
   if (a > b) @{
      ret a;
   @}
   ret b;
@}
@end example

@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Be
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Be
@c * Ref.Stmt.Be::                 Statement for stopping and executing a tail call.

Executing a @code{be} statement @footnote{A @code{be} statement in is
analogous to a @code{become} statement in Newsqueak or Alef.}
destroys the current function activation frame and replaces it with an
activation frame for the called function. In other words, @code{be}
executes a tail-call. The syntactic form of a @code{be} statement is
therefore limited to @emph{tail position}: its argument must be a
@emph{call expression}, and it must be the last statement in a block.

An example of a @code{be} statement:
@example
fn print_loop(int n) -> () @{
  if (n <= 0) @{
    ret;
  @} else @{
    print_int(n);
    be print_loop(n-1);
  @}
@}
@end example

The above example executes in constant space, replacing each frame
with a new copy of itself.



@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Put
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Put
@c * Ref.Stmt.Put::                Statement for pausing and producing a value.

Executing a @code{put} statement copies a value into the put slot of
the current iterator function, suspends execution of the current
iterator function, and transfers control to the current put-recipient
frame.@footnote{A @code{put} statement is analogous to a @code{yield}
statement in the CLU language, or in more recent languages providing a
``generator'' facility, such as Python, Javascript or C#. Like the
generators of CLU, but @emph{unlike} these later languages, Rust's
iterator functions reside on the stack and obey a strict stack
discipline.} The current put-recipient will eventually resume the
suspended iterator function containing the @code{put} statement,
either continuing execution after the @code{put} statement, or
terminating its execution and destroying the iterator function frame.


@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Fail
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Fail
@c * Ref.Stmt.Fail::               Statement for nonlocal control transfer during failure.

Executing a @code{fail} statement causes a process to enter the
@emph{failing} state. In the @emph{failing} state, a process unwinds
its stack, destroying all frames and freeing all resources until it
reaches its @code{main} frame, at which point it runs its @code{fini}
block and enters the @emph{finished} state.

@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Log
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Log
@c * Ref.Stmt.Log::                Statement for logging values to diagnostic buffers.

Executing a @code{log} statement may, depending on runtime
configuration, cause a value to be appended to an internal diagnostic
logging buffer provided by the runtime or emitted to a system
console. Log statements are enabled or disabled dynamically at
run-time on a per-process and per-item basis. @xref{Ref.Run.Log}.

Executing a @code{log} statement not considered a ``side effect'' for
the purposes of differentiating pure and impure functions. In other
words, a pure function remains pure even if it contains a log
statement.

@example
@end example

@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Note
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Note
@c * Ref.Stmt.Note::                Statement for logging values during failure.

A @code{note} statement has no effect during normal execution. The
purpose of a @code{note} statement is to provide additional diagnostic
information to the logging subsystem during process
failure. @xref{Ref.Stmt.Log}. Using @code{note} statements, normal
diagnostic logging can be kept relatively sparse, while still
providing verbose diagnostic ``backtraces'' when a process fails.

When a process is failing, control frames @emph{unwind} from the
innermost frame to the outermost, and from the innermost lexical block
within an unwinding frame to the outermost. When unwinding a lexical
block, the runtime processes all the @code{note} statements in the block
sequentially, from the first statement of the block to the last.
During processing, a @code{note} statement has equivalent meaning to a
@code{log} statement: it causes the runtime to append the argument of
the @code{note} to the internal logging diagnostic buffer.

An example of a @code{note} statement:
@example
fn read_file_lines(~str path) -> vec[str] @{
    note path;
    vec[str] r;
    file f = open_read(path);
    for* (str ~s = lines(f)) @{
        vec.append(r,s);
    @}
    ret r;
@}
@end example

In this example, if the process fails while attempting to open or read
a file, the runtime will log the path name that was being read. If the
function completes normally, the runtime will not log the path.

A slot that is marked by a @code{note} statement does @emph{not} have
its value copied aside when control passes through the @code{note}. In
other words, if a @code{note} statement notes a particular slot, and
code after the @code{note} that slot, and then a subsequent failure
occurs, the @emph{mutated} value will be logged during unwinding,
@emph{not} the original value that was held in the slot at the moment
control passed through the @code{note} statement.

@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.While
@subsection Ref.Stmt.While
@c * Ref.Stmt.While::              Statement for simple conditional looping.

A @code{while} statement is a loop construct. A @code{while} loop
may be either a simple @code{while} or a @code{do}-@code{while} loop.

In the case of a simple @code{while}, the loop begins by evaluating
the boolean loop conditional expression. If the loop conditional
expression evaluates to @code{true}, the loop body block executes and
control returns to the loop conditional expression. If the loop
conditional expression evaluates to @code{false}, the @code{while}
statement completes.

In the case of a @code{do}-@code{while}, the loop begins with an
execution of the loop body. After the loop body executes, it evaluates
the loop conditional expression. If it evaluates to @code{true},
control returns to the beginning of the loop body. If it evaluates to
@code{false}, control exits the loop.

An example of a simple @code{while} statement:
@example
while (i < 10) @{
    print("hello\n");
    i = i + 1;
@}
@end example

An example of a @code{do}-@code{while} statement:
@example
do @{
    print("hello\n");
    i = i + 1;
@} while (i < 10);
@end example

@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Break
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Break
@c * Ref.Stmt.For::                Statement for terminating a loop.

Executing a @code{break} statement immediately terminates the
innermost loop enclosing it. It is only permitted in the body of a
loop.

@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Cont
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Cont
@c * Ref.Stmt.For::                Statement for terminating a single loop iteration.

Executing a @code{cont} statement immediately terminates the current
iteration of the innermost loop enclosing it, returning control to the
loop @emph{head}. In the case of a @code{while} loop, the head is the
conditional expression controlling the loop. In the case of a
@code{for} loop, the head is the iterator or vector-slice increment
controlling the loop.

A @code{cont} statement is only permitted in the body of a loop.


@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.For
@subsection Ref.Stmt.For
@c * Ref.Stmt.For::                Statement for complex conditional looping.

A @code{for} statement is a loop construct. There are two types of
@code{for} statement: @emph{linear} for-loops and @emph{iterator}
for-loops.

@menu
* Ref.Stmt.For.Linear::         Statement for looping over vectors.
* Ref.Stmt.For.Iter::           Statement for general conditional looping.
@end menu

@page
@node          Ref.Stmt.For.Linear
@subsubsection Ref.Stmt.For.Linear
@c * Ref.Stmt.For.Linear::         Statement for looping over vectors.

A @dfn{linear for-loop} is controlled by a @emph{slice}, which has the
syntactic form of a normal vector or string indexing expression,
except the index is either a 2-tuple or a 3-tuple describing a bounded
linear arithmetic sequence of indices to be selected from the vector
or string. The linear for-loop bounds-checks the sequence @emph{once}
when initiating the loop, then repeatedly copies each value in the
sequence into the element variable, executing the loop body once per
copy.

Within the loop body, the vector or string is only accessible as a
read alias.

The 3-tuple form of slice provides an initial index @var{i}, a
bounding index @var{b}, and a step value @var{s}. The associated
linear loop executes once for each index @var{x = i + n * s} such that
@code{@var{x} < @var{b}} if @var{s} is positive, or @code{@var{x} >
@var{b}} if @var{s} is negative, and where @var{n} ranges over
successive integers @code{0}, @code{1}, @dots{}

If @var{s} is @code{0}, a signal is generated.

If the initial index of a slice is omitted, it is implicitly @code{0}.
If the bounding index of a slice if omtited, it is implicitly the length
of the indexed vector or string. If the step value of a slice if ommited,
it is implicitly @code{1}.

The 2-tuple form of slice is equivalent to ommitting the step value in
the 3-tuple form.

Example of a 4 linear for-loops, all identical:
@example
let vec[foo] v = vec(a, b, c);

for (~foo e = v.(0, vec.len(v), 1)) @{
    bar(e);
@}

for (~foo e = v.(0, vec.len(v))) @{
    bar(e);
@}

for (~foo e = v.(0,)) @{
    bar(e);
@}

for (~foo e = v.(,)) @{
    bar(e);
@}
@end example

@page
@node          Ref.Stmt.For.Iter
@subsubsection Ref.Stmt.For.Iter
@c * Ref.Stmt.For.Iter::           Statement for general conditional looping.

An @dfn{iterator} for-loop is controlled by an iterator function. The
for loop executes once for each value @code{put} by the iterator
function.  When the iterator function returns or fails, the loop
terminates.

The protocol of an iterator for-loop must match the protocol of the iterator
function it is calling. @xref{Ref.Item.Fn.Iter}.

Example of an iterator for-loop:
@example
let str txt;
let vec[str] lines;
for* (~str s = str.split(txt, "\n")) @{
    vec.push(lines, s);
@}
@end example


@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.If
@subsection Ref.Stmt.If
@c * Ref.Stmt.If::                 Statement for simple conditional branching.

An @code{if} statement is a conditional branch in program control. The
form of an @code{if} statement is a parenthesised condition
expression, followed by a consequent block, and an optional trailing
@code{else} block. The condition expression must have type
@code{bool}. If the condition expression evaluates to @code{true}, the
consequent block is executed and any @code{else} block is skipped. If
the condition expression evaluates to @code{false}, the consequent
block is skipped and any @code{else} block is executed.

@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Alt
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Alt
@c * Ref.Stmt.Alt::                Statement for complex conditional branching.

An @code{alt} statement is a multi-directional branch in program control.
There are three kinds of @code{alt} statement: communication @code{alt}
statements, @code{alt tag} statements, and @code{alt type} statements.

The form of each kind of @code{alt} is similar: an initial @emph{head}
that describes the criteria for branching, followed by a sequence of
zero or more labaled @emph{arms}, each of which describes a
@emph{case} and provides a @emph{block} of statements associated with
the case. When an @code{alt} is executed, control enters the head,
determines which of the cases to branch to, branches to the block
associated with the chosen case, and then proceeds to the statement
following the @code{alt} when the case block completes.

@menu
* Ref.Stmt.Alt.Comm::         Statement for branching on communication events.
* Ref.Stmt.Alt.Pat::          Statement for branching on pattern matches.
* Ref.Stmt.Alt.Type::         Statement for branching on types.
@end menu

@page
@node          Ref.Stmt.Alt.Comm
@subsubsection Ref.Stmt.Alt.Comm
@c * Ref.Stmt.Alt.Comm::           Statement for branching on communication events.

The simplest form of @code{alt} statement is the a
@emph{communication} @code{alt}. The cases of a communication
@code{alt}'s arms are send, receive and flush
statements. @xref{Ref.Proc.Comm}.

To execute a communication @code{alt}, the runtime checks all of the
ports and channels involved in the arms of the statement to see if any
@code{case} can execute without blocking.  If no @code{case} can
execute, the process blocks, and the runtime unblocks the process when
a @code{case} @emph{can} execute. The runtime then makes a
pseudorandom choice from among the set of @code{case} statements that
can execute, executes the statement of the @code{case} and branches to
the block of that arm.

An example of a communication @code{alt} statement:
@example
let chan c[int] = foo();
let port p[str] = bar();
let int x = 0;
let vec[str] strs;

alt @{
    case (str s <- p) @{
        vec.append(strs, s);
    @}
    case (c <| x) @{
        x++;
    @}
@}
@end example

@page
@node          Ref.Stmt.Alt.Pat
@subsubsection Ref.Stmt.Alt.Pat
@c * Ref.Stmt.Alt.Pat::            Statement for branching on pattern matches.

A pattern @code{alt} statement branches on a @emph{pattern}. The exact
form of matching that occurs depends on the pattern. Patterns consist
of some combination of literals, tag constructors, variable binding
specifications and placeholders (@code{_}). A pattern @code{alt} has a
parenthesized @emph{head expression}, which is the value to compare to
the patterns. The type of the patterns must equal the type of the head
expression.

To execute a pattern @code{alt} statement, first the head expression
is evaluated, then its value is sequentially compared to the patterns
in the arms until a match is found. The first arm with a matching
@code{case} pattern is chosen as the branch target of the @code{alt},
any variables bound by the pattern are assigned to local @emph{auto}
slots in the arm's block, and control enters the block.

An example of a pattern @code{alt} statement:

@example
type list[X] = tag(nil, cons(X, @@list[X]));

let list[int] x = cons(10, cons(11, nil));

alt (x) @{
    case (cons(a, cons(b, _))) @{
        process_pair(a,b);
    @}
    case (cons(v=10, _)) @{
        process_ten(v);
    @}
    case (_) @{
        fail;
    @}
@}
@end example


@page
@node          Ref.Stmt.Alt.Type
@subsubsection Ref.Stmt.Alt.Type
@c * Ref.Stmt.Alt.Type::           Statement for branching on type.

An @code{alt type} statement is similar to a pattern @code{alt}, but
branches on the @emph{type} of its head expression, rather than the
value. The head expression of an @code{alt type} statement must be of
type @code{any}, and the arms of the statement are slot patterns
rather than value patterns. Control branches to the arm with a
@code{case} that matches the @emph{actual type} of the value in the
@code{any}.

An example of an @code{alt type} statement:

@example
let any x = foo();

alt type (x) @{
    case (int i) @{
        ret i;
    @}
    case (list[int] li) @{
        ret int_list_sum(li);
    @}
    case (list[X] lx) @{
        ret list_len(lx);
    @}
    case (_) @{
        ret 0;
    @}
@}
@end example


@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Prove
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Prove
@c * Ref.Stmt.Prove::              Statement for static assertion of typestate.

A @code{prove} statement has no run-time effect. Its purpose is to
statically check (and document) that its argument constraint holds at
its statement entry point. If its argument typestate does not hold,
under the typestate algorithm, the program containing it will fail to
compile.

@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.Check
@subsection Ref.Stmt.Check
@c * Ref.Stmt.Check::              Statement for dynamic assertion of typestate.

A @code{check} statement connects dynamic assertions made at run-time
to the static typestate system. A @code{check} statement takes a
constraint to check at run-time. If the constraint holds at run-time,
control passes through the @code{check} and on to the next statement
in the enclosing block. If the condition fails to hold at run-time, the
@code{check} statement behaves as a @code{fail} statement.

The typestate algorithm is built around @code{check} statements, and
in particular the fact that control @emph{will not pass} a check
statement with a condition that fails to hold. The typestate algorithm
can therefore assume that the (static) postcondition of a @code{check}
statement includes the checked constraint itself. From there, the
typestate algorithm can perform dataflow calculations on subsequent
statements, propagating conditions forward and statically comparing
implied states and their specifications. @xref{Ref.Stmt.Stat}.

@example
pred even(~int x) @{
    ret x & 1 == 0;
@}

fn print_even(int x) : even(x) -> () @{
    print(x);
@}

fn test() @{
    let int y = 8;

    // Cannot call print_even(y) here.

    check even(y);

    // Can call print_even(y) here, since even(y) now holds.
    print_even(y);
@}
@end example

@page
@node       Ref.Stmt.IfCheck
@subsection Ref.Stmt.IfCheck
@c * Ref.Stmt.IfCheck::            Statement for dynamic testing of typestate.

An @code{if check} statement combines a @code{if} statement and a
@code{check} statement in an indivisible unit that can be used to
build more complex conditional control flow than the @code{check}
statement affords.

In fact, @code{if check} is a ``more primitive'' statement
@code{check}; instances of the latter can be rewritten as instances of
the former. The following two examples are equivalent:

@sp 1
Example using @code{check}:
@example
check even(x);
print_even(x);
@end example

@sp 1
Equivalent example using @code{if check}:
@example
if check even(x) @{
    print_even(x);
@} else @{
    fail;
@}
@end example

@page
@node    Ref.Run
@section Ref.Run
@c * Ref.Run::                     Organisation of runtime services.

The Rust @dfn{runtime}@footnote{The @emph{runtime} (un-hyphenated) is
a piece of code; it provides a variety of services @emph{at
run-time}.} is a relatively compact collection of C and Rust code that
provides fundamental services and datatypes to all Rust processes at
run-time. It is smaller and simpler than many modern language
runtimes. It is tightly integrated into the language's execution model
of slots, processes, programs, communication, reflection, logging and
signal handling.

@menu
* Ref.Run.Mem::                 Runtime memory management service.
* Ref.Run.Type::                Runtime built-in type services.
* Ref.Run.Comm::                Runtime communication service.
* Ref.Run.Refl::                Runtime reflection system.
* Ref.Run.Log::                 Runtime logging system.
* Ref.Run.Sig::                 Runtime signal handler.
@end menu

@page
@node       Ref.Run.Mem
@subsection Ref.Run.Mem
@c * Ref.Run.Mem::                 Runtime memory management service.

The runtime memory-management system is based on
a @emph{service-provider interface}, through which the runtime
requests blocks of memory from its environment and releases them back
to its environment when they are no longer in use. The default
implementation of the service-provider interface consists of the C
runtime functions @code{malloc} and @code{free}.

The runtime memory-management system in turn supplies Rust
processes with facilities for allocating, extending and releasing
stacks, as well as allocating and freeing exterior values.

@page
@node       Ref.Run.Type
@subsection Ref.Run.Type
@c * Ref.Run.Mem::                 Runtime built-in type services.

The runtime provides C and Rust code to manage several built-in types:
@itemize
@item @code{vec}, the type of vectors.
@item @code{str}, the type of UTF-8 strings.
@item @code{int}, the type of arbitrary-precision integers.
@item @code{chan}, the type of communication channels.
@item @code{port}, the type of communication ports.
@item @code{proc}, the type of processes.
@end itemize
Support for other built-in types such as simple types, tuples,
records, vectors and tags is open-coded by the Rust compiler.

Built-in type support code is a @emph{mandatory} component of the runtime.

@page
@node       Ref.Run.Comm
@subsection Ref.Run.Comm
@c * Ref.Run.Comm::                Runtime communication service.

The runtime provides code to manage inter-process communication.
This includes the system of process-lifecycle state transitions
depending on the contents of queues, as well as code to copy values
between queues and their recipients and to serialize values for
transmission over operating-system inter-process communication
facilities.

Communication is a @emph{mandatory} component of the runtime,
though the portion that invokes operating-system communication
facilities is @emph{optional}.

@page
@node       Ref.Run.Refl
@subsection Ref.Run.Refl
@c * Ref.Run.Refl::                Runtime reflection system.

The runtime reflection system is driven by the DWARF tables
emitted into a crate at compile-time. Reflecting on a slot or type
allocates a Rust data structure corresponding to the DWARF DIE for
that slot or type.

Reflection is a @emph{mandatory} component of the runtime.

@page
@node       Ref.Run.Log
@subsection Ref.Run.Log
@c * Ref.Run.Log::                 Runtime logging system.

The runtime contains a system for directing logging statements to a
logging console and/or internal logging
buffers. @xref{Ref.Stmt.Log}. Logging statements can be enabled or
disabled via a two-dimensional filtering process:

@itemize

@sp 1
@item
By Item

Each @emph{item} (module, function, predicate, etc.) in Rust has
a static name-path within its crate module, and can have logging enabled
or disabled on a name-path-prefix basis.

@sp 1
@item
By Process

Each @emph{process} in a running Rust program has a unique ownership-path
through the process ownership tree, and can have logging enabled or
disabled on an ownership-path-prefix basis.
@end itemize

Logging is integrated into the language for efficiency reasons, as
well as the need to filter logs based on these two built-in
dimensions, and finally due to the need to consider logging as
a @emph{pure} (non-side-effect-producing) operation for the purposes
of the typestate algorithm.

Logging is an @emph{optional} component of the runtime.

@page
@node       Ref.Run.Sig
@subsection Ref.Run.Sig
@c * Ref.Run.Sig::               Runtime signal handler.

The runtime signal-handling system is driven by a signal-dispatch
table and a signal queue associated with each process. Sending a
signal to a process inserts the signal into the process' signal queue
and marks the process as having a pending signal. At the next
scheduling opportunity, the runtime processes signals in the process'
queue using its dispatch table. The signal queue memory is accounted
for from the process' memory budget; if the queue grows too big, the
process will fail.

Signal handling is a @emph{mandatory} component of the runtime.

@c ############################################################
@c end main body of nodes
@c ############################################################

@page
@node    Index
@chapter Index

@printindex cp

@bye
